Grammar Notes for 나무꾼과 선녀

그 흔적을 잡아두려는 양
Pattern: -는 양
Pattern Gloss: Abbreviation of –는 모양 giving the appearance, shape, or form of …ing; evincing signs or indications of …ing; as if to, in a manner suggestive of...
Here: as if to catch/arrest their traces

물의 기억을 잊은 채
Pattern: -(으)ㄴ 채(로)
Pattern Gloss: just as it is or did, (in) the original state of....
Here: having forgotten all memories of the water

서랍 어느 한쪽에 갇히듯
Pattern: -듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: is like, is as (if). Martin treats this as an abbreviation of the pattern where 듯 is used as a post-modifier, i.e.-(으)ㄴ 듯(이), -(으)ㄹ 듯(이), -는 듯(이); but in any case you should keep them distinct. In the pattern here, -듯 attaches directly to the base without any intervening modifier.
Here: as if locked up in one corner of a drawer

어둠 저편으로 사라져버린 날들
Pattern: -어 버린다
Pattern Gloss: does completely, gets it (all) done, disposes of (the job): (does it) all/up/down/away/off; does to one‘s disappointment or regret; does it to one’s relief.
Here: days that had disappeared into the far side of the darkness

아주 가끔씩
Pattern: 씩
Pattern Gloss: distributive particle
Here: only every once in a while; on a very irregular basis; very sporadically

지수는 밤새 깨어 있었다.
Pattern: -어 있다
Pattern Gloss: resultant state: is in the state of resulting from …ing.
Here: Chisu was awake all night long

잠이 오지 않는 밤이면
Pattern: -(이)면
Pattern Gloss: When it comes/came to...; As for...
Here: on nights when she couldn't get to sleep

늘 그렇듯이
Pattern: -듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: is like, is as (if). Martin treats this as an abbreviation of the pattern where 듯 is used as a post-modifier, i.e. -(으)ㄴ 듯(이), -(으)ㄹ 듯(이), -는 듯(이); but in any case you should keep them distinct. In the pattern here, -듯 attaches directly to the base without any intervening modifier.
Here: as was always the case

그녀를 위로하듯
Pattern: -듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: is like, is as (if). Martin treats this as an abbreviation of the pattern where 듯 is used as a post-modifier, i.e. -(으)ㄴ 듯(이), -(으)ㄹ 듯 (이), -는 듯(이); but in any case you should keep them distinct. In the pattern here, -듯 attaches directly to the base without any intervening modifier.
Here: as if to console her

누군가 어둠 속에서 수영을 하는가
Pattern: -는가
Pattern Gloss: I wonder whether...; Could it be that...?
Here: was somebody perhaps swimming in the dark?

그녀의 귀는 가청 범위가 점차 커져
Pattern: -어 진다
Pattern Gloss: gets to be or becomes with adjectives.
Here: the hearing radius/range of her ears gradually grew larger

그 바다 너머에서 잠깨어 우는 아이
Pattern: NOUN 너머
Pattern Gloss: beyond, over, the other side of (something tall/high) NOUN; over = more than, in excess of; beyond.
Here: a child across the sea who had woken up and was crying

가슴속에서 들린 듯 선명했다.
Pattern: -(으)ㄴ 듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: 듯(이) as post-modifier (cf. also -(으)ㄹ 듯(이), -는 듯(이)) (seem) as if has done... ; (seem) as if it did.... Similar in function to BASE + 듯(이), but you should keep them distinct.
Here: was clear, as if it had been heard inside her heart

무언가 둔중한 것
Pattern: WH …-(이)ㄴ가
Pattern Gloss: some-WH or other.
Here: something [or other] dull

떨어져 내리는 소리
Pattern: -어(서)
Pattern Gloss: Naked infinitive abbreviated from -어(서).
Here: the sound of [something] falling down

이제까지의 모든 소리들
Pattern: 까지의
Pattern Gloss: up to, until + particle 의 adnominalized to (modifying) a following noun phrase.
Here: all sounds [characterized by the fact that they are] up until now

누군가의 비명
Pattern: WH …-(이)ㄴ가
Pattern Gloss: some-WH or other.
Here: somebody's scream

마치 ... 이 순간을 기다리기라도 한 듯
Pattern: 마치 …-(으)ㄴ듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: The 마치 flags an upcoming like pattern in 처럼, 같다 or (as here) 듯(이). The pattern in -(으)ㄴ 듯(이) has 듯(이) as post-modifier (cf. also -(으)ㄹ 듯(이), -는 듯(이)) (seem) as if has done... ; (seem) as if it did... and is similar in function to BASE + 듯(이), but you should keep them distinct. Note also -기라도 한다 does blah-blah-blah or the like, with the nominalized form in -기 followed by pseudo-particle -(이)라도 (1) even if (it be); (2) just, (or the) like.
Here: just as if...had been waiting [or something] for this instant [or something]

잠든 척 누워 있다
Pattern: -다(가)
Pattern Gloss: transferentive: does/did (is/was) and then; does/did (is/was) but; when emphasizing a shift of place, purpose, direction, benefit, etc. in the action occurring.
Here: lay down for a while pretending to be asleep, and then...

몰라, 무슨 일인지.
Pattern: WH …-(으)ㄴ지
Pattern Gloss: whether (how, what,…) it is (paired with a question word).
Here: no idea what it might be; don't know what's the matter

밤새 깨어 있었던 흔적을 내지 않느라
Pattern: -느라(고)
Pattern Gloss: with the idea to do, with the intention of doing, trying to do; what with doing, as a result of doing, because of (doing...). Note also resultant state -어 있다 is in the state of resulting from, is done.
Here: in an effort to give no indication that she had been awake all night long

무슨 일이 일어날 수 있겠는가.
Pattern: -는가
Pattern Gloss: is it the case that...? (I wonder).
Here: what could possibly happen?

시간이 멈춘 듯한 이 아름다운 작은 섬
Pattern: -(으)ㄴ 듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: 듯(이) as post-modifier (cf. also -(으)ㄹ 듯(이), -는 듯(이)) (seem) as if has done...; (seem) as if it did.... Similar in function to BASE + 듯 (이), but you should keep them distinct.
Here: this beautiful little island characterized by the fact that time seems to have stopped

평생을 그래왔다는 듯
Pattern: -다는 듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: Based on an abbreviated indirect quotation in -다[고 하-] + …-는 듯(이) like, as, giving the appearance of...; appearing (to be), looking (like); seeming as if; as if/though so: as if to say... Note also -어 온다 gradually (comes in doing); comes up (along); starts (has started) becoming /doing; has/had been doing.
Here: as to say they had done that all their lives

바다를 거니는 사람들뿐이었는데.
Pattern: 뿐(이다)
Pattern Gloss: (is) only, merely, just, alone.
Here: they were just people strolling along the sea

남편이 다시 잠들고 나서야
Pattern: -고 나서야
Pattern Gloss: only after ...ing; only once one has done, from -고 나사 after ...ing + (이)야 only if.
Here: only once her husband had gone back to sleep again

발코니로 향한 문
Pattern: -(으)로 향하다
Pattern Gloss: face in the direction of, face toward (here as modifier).
Here: the door facing the balcony

조심스레 열었다.
Pattern: -스레
Pattern Gloss: = -스러이 like, as; in a blah-blah-blah kind of way or manner (adverb derived from -스럽다).
Here: opened it cautiously

그녀의 방에서도 손에 잡힐 듯
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ 듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: like, as, giving the appearance of...; appearing  (to be), looking (like); seeming as if; as if/though. On the future/prospective modifier, as here, the meaning is giving the appearance that it might or will...; seeming as if/though it might.
Here: as if it could be grasped in her hand even from her room

가까워 보이는 푸른 잔디
Pattern: -어 보인다
Pattern Gloss: looks like, appears to be (on a descriptive verb).
Here: the green lawn which looked close by

저편에 무언가 하얀 물체가 있었다.
Pattern: WH …-(이)ㄴ가
Pattern Gloss: some-WH or other.
Here: there was some white object over there

사람들이 웅성거리며 아래를 내려다보고 있었다
Pattern: -거린다
Pattern Gloss: usually on a mimetic stem to mean does repeatedly/continuously; does and does; keeps doing, does on and on, does (keeps doing) it away; does again and again, does over and over again.
Here: people were buzzing and looking down below

저게 뭘까.
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ까?
Pattern Gloss: tentative question: could it be that...? is it perhaps the case that...?
Here: what might that thing might be?

흰 새처럼 보이는 그 물체
Pattern: NOU처럼 보인다
Pattern Gloss: look like a NOUN, appear to be a NOUN.
Here: the object, which looked like a white bird

그 물체를 향해
Pattern: NOUN을 향해(서)
Pattern Gloss: = NOUN을 향하여(서) in the direction of NOUN, toward NOUN.
Here: in the direction of the object

그것을 안아 올렸다.
Pattern: -아(서)
Pattern Gloss: Naked infinitive abbreviated from -아(서).
Here: picked it up in his arms

물체의 무게가 실린 듯
Pattern: -(으)ㄴ 듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: 듯(이) as post-modifier (cf. also -(으)ㄹ 듯(이), -는 듯(이)) (seem) as if has done ... ; (seem) as if it did.... Similar in  function to BASE + 듯(이), but you should keep them distinct.
Here: as if the weight of the object were loaded/carried upon him

남자의 몸이 휘청거렸다.
Pattern: -거린다
Pattern Gloss: usually on a mimetic: does like (the action or state indicated by the mimetic it is attached to); does repeatedly/continuously; does and does; keeps doing, does on and on, does (keeps doing) it away; does again and again, does over and over again.
Here: the man's body wobbled/teetered [‘went 휘청휘청’]

죄지은 듯
Pattern: -(으)ㄴ 듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: (seem) as if has done... ; (seem) as if it did.... with 듯(이) as post-modifier (cf. also -(으)ㄹ 듯(이), -는 듯(이)). Similar in function to BASE + 듯(이), but you should keep them distinct.
Here: as if they had committed a crime

늘어뜨려진 머리채
Pattern: -어 진다
Pattern Gloss: Besides meaning gets to be or becomes with adjectives, can have the effect of a "get-passive" in English or of middles or reflexives in languages which have these. The implication is that the subject/agent is either (sometimes adversely) affected by the action, and/or has no control over the action of the verb.
Here: drooping hair trusses; hair trusses that drooped

육체를 슬퍼하듯
Pattern: -듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: Martin treats this as an abbreviation of the pattern where 듯 is used as a post-modifier, i.e. -(으)ㄴ 듯(이), -(으)ㄹ 듯(이), -는 듯 (이); but in any case you should keep them distinct. In the pattern here, -듯 attaches directly to the base without any intervening modifier.
Here: as if feeling sad for the body

오래도록 바라보았다.
Pattern: -도록
Pattern Gloss: projective: to the point where, until (a result); so that.
Here: gazed at it for a long time

말갛게 닦여진 신호등
Pattern: -어 진다
Pattern Gloss: Besides meaning gets to be or becomes with adjectives, can have the effect of a "get-passive" in English or of middles or reflexives in languages which have these. The implication is that the subject/agent is either (sometimes adversely) affected by the action, and/or has no control over the action of the verb. Note also adverbative -게.
Here: traffic lights that had been polished clear

이 섬에도 죽음이 있다는 사실
Pattern: -다는 사실
Pattern Gloss: the putative/alleged fact that, abbreviated from an indirect quotation in -다[고 하]는, adnominalizated to 사실 fact. Note also the substantive in -(으)ㅁ the act (or fact) of doing or being (here on 죽- die).
Here: the fact that there was death on this island, too

요란스레 앰뷸런스 소리가 울렸다.
Pattern: -스레
Pattern Gloss: = -스러이 like, as; in a blah-blah-blah kind of way or manner (adverb derived from -스럽다).
Here: the sound of the ambulance rang out noisily

임신한 지 5개월에 접어든 무렵이었다.
Pattern: -(으)ㄴ 무렵
Pattern Gloss: the (approximate) time/occasion when (something happened ~ had happened). Usually you will see postmodifier 무렵 following the prospective modifier -(으)ㄹ, but here it is on modifier -(으)ㄴ.
Here: it was at about the time when she was getting past having been pregnant for 5 months

고열에 시달리면서도
Pattern: -(으)면서도
Pattern Gloss: while... yet; although ... also; at the very same time that. Compare the pattern in -어도, which can have different subjects for the two clauses; -(으)면서도 usually has the same subject for both.
Here: even though/while she was suffering from a fever/high temperature

의사를 찾아가려 하지 않았다.
Pattern: -(으)려(고) 한다
Pattern Gloss: intentive –(으)려: with the thought in mind to do, with the intention of doing, with the desire to do; ready (prepared, willing) to do. As this example shows, the 고 is optional; it is more likely to be omitted in writing than in speech.
Here: she did not make an attempt to go see a doctor

필요 없을 만큼
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ 만큼
Pattern Gloss: to the extent that  will do/be (equivalent to the pattern in -(으)ㄹ 정도); enough to do, as much as necessary for doing.
Here: it was also because he was healthy to the extent that it was unnecessary

그가 건강한 탓이기도 했다.
Pattern: -(으)ㄴ 탓이다
Pattern Gloss: is due to [the unpleasant or regrettable fact that...], is the fault of having…with post-modifier 탓 fault, reason. Note also -기도 하다 also is/is also.
Here: it was also because he was healthy to the extent that it was unnecessary

무언가 예기치 않았던 일이 닥치면
Pattern: 치 않다
Pattern Gloss: Abbreviation of 하지 to 치 in the long negation pattern (예기하지 않- → 예기치 않-). Note also WH  …-(이)ㄴ가 some-WH or other.
Here: whenever some unanticipated event happened

그것이 아무리 어려운 일이어도
Pattern: 아무리 ... -어도
Pattern Gloss: no matter WH- one does/is; WH-ever one does/is. Same as WH …-어도
Here: no matter how difficult a thing it might be

당황하는 법이 없었다.
Pattern: -는 법(이) 없다
Pattern Gloss: there are never times/occasions when sb/sth can reasonably be expected to do. Here 법 works as a post-modifier meaning occasion, event (like 작, 수, 일), but is invariable followed by 없다 (cases with 있다 tend to be rhetorical questions, implying a negative response).
Here: he was never flustered

절로 해결되는 걸 공연히 안달복달할 필요가 없다는 거였다.
Pattern: -다는 것이다
Pattern Gloss: treated colloquially as -다는 거다 meaning literally It is a case of saying/claiming that QUOTE, or What I'm saying is that QUOTE, derived from an abbrevation of –다[고 하]는 것이다. Note also 걸 abbreviated from 것을.
Here: it was a case of saying that there was no need to get all bent out of shape for no good reason over something that will resolve itself on its own

그건 원래 그렇게 되어 있었어.
Pattern: -어 있다
Pattern Gloss: resultant state: is in the state of resulting from, is done.
Here: it was pre-ordained/destined to be that way from the start (it was meant to be that way) [lit.: it was in a state resulting from having become that way originally]

그가 그런 말을 해야 하는 경우란
Pattern: -(이)란
Pattern Gloss: From -(이)라[고 하는 것]은, used to set up a generic/generalized topic (for generic pronouncements or universalizing/generalizing statements).
Here: but situations/cases where he had to say such things [as a sweeping/generalizing topic]

영화의 어느 장면처럼 실신한 채
Pattern: -(으)ㄴ 채(로)
Pattern Gloss: just as it is or did, (in) the original state of....
Here: as if having brought to life a scene from a movie

들것에 실려 앰뷸런스를 타야 했다.
Pattern: -어(서)
Pattern Gloss: Naked infinitive abbreviated from -어(서).
Here: was loaded onto a stretcher and had to ride an ambulance

백 원 동전 만한 흰 원
Pattern: NOUN 만하다
Pattern Gloss: is to the extent of NOUN, is as big/little as NOUN, is the size of NOUN.
Here: a white circle the size of a 500-won coin

누군가 잘못 떨어뜨린 솜뭉치
Pattern: WH …-(이)ㄴ가
Pattern Gloss: some-WH or other.
Here: a cotton wad that somebody [or other] had accidentally dropped

솜뭉치처럼 보였다.
Pattern: NOUN처럼 보인다
Pattern Gloss: looks like a NOUN, appears to be a NOUN.
Here: looked like a cotton wad

“이건, 불랙 홀이 아니라 화이트 홀이군.”
Pattern: A가 아니라 B이다
Pattern Gloss:  is not the case that A, (but rather B); not A but B. Note also Apperceptive/First Realization -군(요), -구나 Well I see..., well so it is ..., so it is! so it seems! well I'll be (damned)! now that I think about it, I realize... (shows a sudden realization, confirmation, interest, delight, surprise, astonishment or insistence).
Here: So -- this isn't not a black hole, but a white hole! [I see]

웃으며 말했지만
Pattern: -(으)며
Pattern Gloss: For -(으)면서while, at the same time.
Here: he spoke with a smile, but

남편의 음성이 불안으로 떨렸다.
Pattern: (으)로
Pattern Gloss: with, by, by means of, through, using.
Here: her husband's voice trembled with anxiety

의사는 활동성 결핵, 이라고...말했다.
Pattern: -(이)라고
Pattern Gloss: Verbatim or direct quotation in -(이)라고.
Here: the doctor said "active TB"

창백하고 아름다운 소녀에게나 어울리는 병이었다.
Pattern: 에게나
Pattern Gloss: 에게 plus -(이)나 or the like, like, or something, or so; the likes of, any; at least, anyway, just (used in gently/vaguely urging way), even if it is not of particular interest.
Here: It was a design appropriate for the likes of a pale, beautiful little girl

어이없는 표정을 숨기지도 못한 채
Pattern: -(으)ㄴ 채(로)
Pattern Gloss: just as it is or did, (in) the original state of....
Here: unable to even conceal his dumbfounded expression

남편과 지수는 한참을 마주보고
Pattern: 을/를
Pattern Gloss: accusative of duration.
Here: Chisu and her husband stood looking at each other for some time

서 있었다.
Pattern: -어 있다
Pattern Gloss: Resultant State: is in the state of resulting from, is done.
Here: Chisu and her husband stood looking at each other for some time

그다지 드문 경우가 아닙니다.
Pattern: 그다지 + Negative
Pattern Gloss: not so...; not such a...
Here: It's not such a rare thing/case.

십중팔구 감염이 되었을 거라고......
Pattern: -었을 거라고
Pattern Gloss: Abbreviated from -었을 것이라고 I'm telling you (-(이)라고) that it is probably the case that was (-었을 것이다) [infected (감염이 되었-)].
Here: [saying that] the chances are you've been infected...

아무런 감염의 징후를 찾을 수 없었다.
Pattern: 아무런 NOUN + Negative
Pattern Gloss: doesn't/didn't...any NOUN. Sometimes the NOUN can be reinforced with particle 도, but this is not obligatory.
Here: couldn't find any indications of infection

가느다랗고 긴 바늘
Pattern: -다랗다
Pattern Gloss:  be rather, quite, sort of (sorta), kind of (kinda); is ...ish (Polite Style -다래요). The loss of the final ㄹ of 가늘다 is regular for all ㄹ-extending bases in this pattern.
Here: an ever-so-thin, long needle

양수를 뽑아내고 했던 검사에서도
Pattern: -고 한다
Pattern Gloss: does...and stuff; does...and the like/and whatnot.
Here: even on the test when they had extracted her fetal waters and stuff

지수의 손가락 길이보다도 짧은
Pattern: NOUN보다도
Pattern Gloss: even (more so) than; than also/either.
Here: shorter even than the length of Chisu’s fingers

그것들을 모두 확인하고도
Pattern: -고도
Pattern Gloss: more or less equivalent to -어도, but with the nuance of even after doing, even after having done; and yet, but, while, though.
Here: even after confirming all of those things

그것들에 덧붙어 있을 듯한 ... 느낌
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ 듯하다
Pattern Gloss: give the appearance that it might or will...; seeming as if/though it might.
Here: the feeling that was as if [another finger] might be attached to them

그 어두운 영상의 틈 사이에 숨어 있을 듯한 느낌
Pattern: 듯(이)
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ 듯하다
Pattern Gloss: give the appearance that it might or will...; seeming as if/though it might.
Here: the feeling that was as if it might be hiding in between the cracks in the dark image

눈에 보이는 모든 기관들이 정상이라 할지라도
Pattern: (설령)… -(으)ㄹ지라도
Pattern Gloss: even if it were so; granted that it were so. Here following quotative -(이)라[고].
Here: even though/supposing that [one says that] all the organs visible to the eye are normal

어쩌면 눈을 뜨지 못할지도 ... 모를 일이었다
Pattern: (어쩌면) ...-(으)ㄹ지도 모른다
Pattern Gloss: lit.: one doesn't know whether, maybe, perhaps it might be the case that. The 어쩌면 does two things: 1) it flags the upcoming perhaps pattern and 2) can also attenuate the maybe~perhaps (somehow~who knows?) meaning.
Here: it was the case that she couldn't tell/one never knew whether it might not be able somehow to open its eyes

어쩌면 울 수 없는 막힌 성대를 가진 아이일지라도 모를 일이었다.
Pattern: (어쩌면)...-(으)ㄹ지라도 모른다
Partern Gloss: i.e., a blend of the patterns in (설령)… -(으)ㄹ 지라도 even if it were so; granted that it were so and (어쩌면)...-(으)ㄹ지도 모른다 (lit.: one doesn't know whether) maybe, perhaps it might be the case that.
Here: it was the case that she couldn't tell/one never knew whether it might be a child somehow with blocked vocal cords, one that couldn't cry

조심스레 중절을 권할 때면
Pattern: -스레
Pattern Gloss: = -스러이 like, as; in a blah-blah-blah kind of way or manner (adverb derived from -스럽다).
Here: whenever [they] cautiously suggested terminating [the pregnancy]

어디가 어떻게 잘못된 아이가 태어나더라도
Pattern: -더라도
Pattern Gloss: even though (it has been observed that...); even granted/supposing that. Most of the time, the retrospective sense of the -더- is completely bleached out in this pattern.
Here: even should a child be born that was somehow in some way deformed

어디가 잘못되었는지 확실히 알 수라도 있는 아이가 태어난다면
Pattern: -는지
Pattern Gloss: the uncertain fact of doing; whether it is doing, wonder whether (how, what,…) (here paired with question word 어디). Note also pseudo-particle -(이)라도 (1) even if (it be); (2) just, (or the ) like (= -(이)나) on the pattern in -(으)ㄹ 수 있다 can do.
Here: if it were the case that a child should be born about whom one could know for certain how/where it was deformed

눈먼 아이라면
Pattern: -(이)라면
Pattern Gloss: = -(이)라[고] 하면 if it (be said to be) be..., if it were (the case) that...  More putative/hypothetical than -(으)면.
Here: if it were a blind child

평생 아이의 눈이 될 수도 있을 것이다.
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ 수도 있다
Pattern Gloss: can even/also do or be.
Here: she could even become the child's eyes for its whole life

수술을 해야 하는 어떤 불구아라면
Pattern: -(이)라면
Pattern Gloss: = -(이)라[고] 하면 if it (be said to be) be..., if it were (the case) that...  More putative/hypothetical than -(으)면.
Here: if it were some sort of disabled child that had to be operated on

몸을 팔아서라도 수술비를 댈 수 있을 것이었다.
Pattern: -(이)라도
Pattern Gloss: (1) even if (it be); (2) just, (or the) like (= -(이)나) on the sequential pattern in -어서 and then.
Here: she would be able to provide the operating fees, even if it meant selling herself

아무런 문제도 없었던 아이
Pattern: 아무런 NOUN
Pattern Gloss: 아무런 NOUN + neg doesn't/didn't ... any NOUN. Sometimes (as here) the NOUN can be reinforced with particle 도, but this is not obligatory.
Here: a child who had had absolutely no problems

분명한 울음으로 태어나
Pattern: (으)로
Pattern Gloss: with, by, by means of, through, using. Note also naked infinitive abbreviated from -아(서).
Here: was born with a clear cry, and

방그레 웃음을 배울 무렵부터
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ 무렵부터
Pattern Gloss: (starting) from the (approximate) time/occasion when.
Here: from about the time when it learned to give a broad smile

자신만의 세계에 갇힌 채
Pattern: -(으)ㄴ 채(로)
Pattern Gloss: just as it is or did, (in) the original state of....
Here: locked up in its own world unto itself

생명이 깃들였다는 것을
Pattern: -(으)ㄴ다는 것, -는다는 것, -다는 것, -(이)라는 것
Pattern Gloss:  the putative or alleged fact that... (here as object). In origin, from the indirect quotation pattern in -는다[고 하]는 것, etc.,
Here: to the extent that it was impossible to believe that there life in it

믿을 수 없을 만큼
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ 만큼
Pattern Gloss: to the extent that will do/be (equivalent to the pattern in -(으)ㄹ 정도); enough to do, as much as necessary for doing.
Here: to the extent that it was impossible to believe that there life in it

제 오빠와 함께가 아니라면
Pattern: -(이)라면
Pattern Gloss: = -(이)라[고] 하면 if it (be said to be) be..., if it were (the case) that... More putative/hypothetical than -(으)면. Here on 아니다, which explains the particle 가 on 함께.
Here: if it wasn't together with her older brother

아무 것도, 그 무엇도 하려 하지 않는 둘째 아이.
Pattern: 아무 NOUN(도) + Negative
Pattern Gloss: no NOUN at all; not any NOUN at all. When the NOUN is just 것, as here, it is usually reinforced with particle 도; the 그 무엇도 is a fancy literary equivalent reprising and emphasizing the 아무 것도. Note also purposive -(으)려[고] 하다, with the -고 dropped.
Here: the second child, who would never do anything, not anything at all

밤이면
Pattern: -(이)면
Pattern Gloss: When it comes/came to...; As for...
Here: nights/at nighttime, as if nothing were the matter

아무 일 없는 듯
Pattern: -는 듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: as (if) doing...
Here: nights/at nighttime, as if nothing were the matter

제 오빠의 곁에 옹송그린 채
Pattern: -(으)ㄴ 채(로)
Pattern Gloss: just as it is or did, (in) the original state of....
Here: curled up beside her older brother

잠들어 있곤 했다.
Pattern: -곤 한다
Pattern Gloss: habitual: makes a habit/regular practice (a regular thing) of doing it; does it from time to time (abbreviated from -고는 한다).
Here: she would always be asleep

자박자박 누군가 다가오는 발소리
Pattern: WH …-(이)ㄴ가
Pattern Gloss: some-WH or other.
Here: the plodding sound of somebody’s footsteps approaching

갑작스레
Pattern: -스레
Pattern Gloss: = -스러이 like, as; in a blah-blah-blah kind of way or manner (adverb derived from -스럽다).
Here: suddenly

갑작스레 후두두 그녀의 창문을 무너뜨리듯
Pattern: -듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: Martin treats this as an abbreviation of the pattern where 듯 is used as a post-modifier, i.e. -(으)ㄴ 듯(이), -(으)ㄹ 듯(이), -는 듯(이); but in any case you should keep them distinct.  In the pattern here, -듯 attaches directly to the base without any intervening modifier.
Here: with a rapping sound as if it might break her window

빗방울 듣는 소리라는 것을
Pattern: -(이)라는 것
Pattern Gloss: the putative or alleged fact that... (here as object). In origin, from the indirect quotation pattern in -(이)라[고 하]는 것, etc.,
Here: even when/after she realized that it was the sound of rain drops falling/dripping

알고도
Pattern: -고도
Pattern Gloss: More or less equivalent to -어도, but with the nuance of even after doing, even after having done; and yet, but, while, though.
Here: even when/after she realized that it was the sound of rain drops falling/dripping

분명히 누군가 자신을 향해 다가오던 느낌.
Pattern: WH …-(이)ㄴ가
Pattern Gloss: some-WH or other. Note also NOUN을 향해(서) in the direction of, facing toward.
Here: the feeling that somebody had clearly been coming toward her

자리에 누운 채로
Pattern: -(으)ㄴ 채(로)
Pattern Gloss: just as it is or did, (in) the original state of....
Here: lying where/as she was in her bed

그녀는 떠오르지 않는 형상을 더듬기라도 하듯
Pattern: -듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: Martin treats this as an abbreviation of the pattern where 듯 is used as a post-modifier, i.e. -(으)ㄴ 듯(이), -(으)ㄹ 듯(이), -는 듯(이); but in any case you should keep them distinct. In the pattern here, -듯 attaches directly to the base without any intervening modifier.
Here: as if to at least grope/fumble for the images that wouldn't come to mind

누운 자리가 눅눅하다는 것을
Pattern: : -는다는 것
Pattern Gloss: the putative or alleged fact that... (here as object). In origin, from the indirect quotation pattern in -는다[고 하]는 것, etc.
Here: the instant she realized that the bedding she was lying on was wet

깨닫는 순간
Pattern: : -는 순간
Pattern Gloss: the moment/instant one does it; as soon as ...; no sooner had one done it, than...
Here: the instant she realized that the bedding she was lying on was wet

예정일이 지나고도 일주일.
Pattern: -고도
Pattern Gloss: More or less equivalent to -어도, but with the nuance of even after doing, even after having done; and yet, but, while, though.
Here: a good week after her due date had passed [lit.: one week, even after her due date had passed]

도무지 세상 밖으로 나올 줄 모르는 아이
Pattern: 도무지 + Negative
Pattern Gloss: emphatic not... at all, etc.
Here: a child who for the life of it didn't know how to come out into the world

기다리다 못해
Pattern: -다(가) 못해
Pattern Gloss: unable to... any longer (lit.: in the middle of ...-ing,  is not able to continue).
Here: unable to wait any longer

지수의 몸이 먼저 아이가 담긴 양수를 밀어내기로 한 모양이었다.
Pattern: -기로 한다
Pattern Gloss: decides to do, makes up one's mind to do; arranges to do; fixes (arranges) it so that; promises (agrees) to do. Note also -(으)ㄴ 모양 the looks of doing/having done, appearance of having done.
Here: It appeared that Chisu's body had decided to be the first to push out the waters encasing the baby

챙겨놓은 가방을 꺼내들다
Pattern: -다(가)
Pattern Gloss: does/ did (is/was) and then; does/did (is/was) but; when emphasizing a shift of place, purpose, direction, benefit, etc. in the action occurring.
Here: the pulled out and hoisted up the travel bag she had prepared in advance

“아직 시작도 않았어요.”
Pattern: -도 않았다
Pattern Gloss: Optional dropping of 하지 in long negatives: 시작[하지]도 않았어요 → 시작도 않았어요.
Here: They haven't even started it.

팔목을 톡톡 두들기고는
Pattern: -고는
Pattern Gloss: Placing the 는 after -고 forces the and [then]... reading of -고, as opposed to the and [also]... reading. In other words, it means when..., ...then; upon doing, but emphasizing the consequence.
Here: tapped her wrist a couple of times, and then

지수의 배 위에 고정시키자
Pattern: -자 (마자)
Pattern Gloss: as soon as, when, no sooner than.
Here: as soon as she affixed it to the top of Chisu's belly

뿜어 나오듯
Pattern: -듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: Martin treats this as an abbreviation of the pattern where 듯 is used as a post-modifier, i.e. -(으)ㄴ 듯(이), -(으)ㄹ 듯(이), -는 듯 (이); but in any case you should keep them distinct. In the pattern here, -듯 attaches directly to the base without any intervening modifier.
Here: as if coming spurting out

진통이 오면 이런 이물감 정도는
Pattern: NOUN 정도(는) the degree, grade, extent, limit, measure, standard, functioning almost like postnoun 따위 the (piddlin', measly, insignificant) likes of.
Here: once the labor pains came, she wouldn't even be able to sense the [piddling] extent of the feeling of an alien object like this

전혀 느끼지도 못할 것이었다.
Pattern: -지도 못한다
Gloss: can't even....
Here: once the labor pains came, she wouldn't even be able to sense the [piddling] extent of the feeling of an alien object like this

몸 어느 한곳이 뻐근해지다
Pattern: -다(가)
Pattern Gloss: does/ did (is/was) and then; does/did (is/was) but; when emphasizing a shift of place, purpose, direction, benefit, etc. in the action occurring.
Here: one part of her body would get dully/heavy, and then

온몸이 어그러지고 말 듯한 고통
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ 듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: giving the appearance that it might or will...; seeming as if/though it might. Note that with ㄹ-extending verbs like 말다 here, the ㄹ in 말 듯 is the modifier on an ㄹ-less base, not the ㄹ of the verb base.
Here: pain that was as if her entire body would end up getting twisted out of joint

머릿속이 하얗게 바래지고
Pattern: -어 진다
Pattern Gloss: Besides meaning gets to be or becomes with adjectives, can have the effect of a "get-passive" in English or of middles or reflexives in languages which have these. The implication is that the subject/agent is either (sometimes adversely) affected by the action, and/or has no control over the action of the verb. The verb here is 바래다 fade, discolor.
Here: the inside of her head (hairs?) would get bleached white

다른 아무 것도 남아 있지 않는 듯한 순간
Pattern: -는 듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: as (if) doing...
Here: the moment when it was as if nothing else was remaining

생의 어느 한때인들
Pattern: -(으)ㄴ들
Pattern Gloss: lit.: granted that, even though it is or does (often followed by or accompanying a rhetorical question). Here the form is on the copula -(이)ㄴ들 granted that it be/is; even though it be/is…
Here: however much it might be one part of human life,

그토록
Pattern: 그토록
Pattern Gloss: to such an extent, presumably from 그하-도록 (not normally used) with projective -도록.
Here: could there ever be a time when one is so infused with the longing for pain so fervently?

절절히 고통에의 열망에 젖을 때가 있을까.
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ까
Pattern Gloss: tentative question: could it be that...? might it happen that...?
Here: could there ever be a time when one is so infused with the longing for pain so fervently?

 “탯줄을 한 손에 잡고 왔더라니깐.
Pattern: -더라니까(는)
Pattern Gloss: from -더라[고 하]니까 I say it is/does or I tell you it is/ does = it really is/does (I insist/reiterate!); it is/does, you see [based on past experiences]. The final 는 has been abbreviated to just ㄴ.
Here: I‘m telling you -- she was holding her umbilical cord in one hand

태반이 안 나왔다는 거야.”
Pattern: -다는 것이다
Pattern Gloss: literally It is a case of saying/claiming that QUOTE, or What I'm saying is that QUOTE, derived from an abbreviation of -다고 하는 것이다. Treated colloquially as -다는 거다.
Here: she was saying that her placenta hadn‘t come out yet

속삭이듯 말하는 그 사람
Pattern: -듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: Martin treats this as an abbreviation of the pattern where 듯 is used as a post-modifier, i.e. -(으)ㄴ 듯(이), -(으)ㄹ 듯(이), -는 듯 (이); but in any case you should keep them distinct. In the pattern here, -듯 attaches directly to the base without any intervening modifier.
Here: the person who was speaking as if in a whisper

“아이는 죽었대죠?"
Pattern: -대죠
Pattern Gloss: Colloquial readjustment of -다죠 → 다지요 → 다[고 하]지요 It's the case that they that QUOTE, right? or I guess they say that QUOTE, eh? (if you're from Canada).
Here: they say the child died, right?

아이 아빠가 고수부지에 버렸대
Pattern: -대
Pattern Gloss: Colloquial abbreviation of -다고 해 for hearsay reporting: they say that QUOTE or I hear that QUOTE.
Here: they say the child‘s father abandoned it on the terraced land on the river

베개 위에 던져진 듯한 그 핏기 없는 얼굴
Pattern: -(으)ㄴ 듯하다
Pattern Gloss: (seem) as if has done... ; (seem) as if it did.... Similar in function to BASE + 듯 (이), but you should keep them distinct. Note also infinitive -어 진다, besides meaning gets to be or becomes with adjectives, can have the effect of a "get-passive" in English or of middles or reflexives in languages which have these. The implication is that the subject/agent is either (sometimes adversely) affected by the action, and/or has no control over the action of the verb.
Here: the bloodless face that looked as if it had been tossed on top of the pillow

머리채가 늘어져 있었다.
Pattern: -어 진다
Pattern Gloss: Besides meaning gets to be or becomes with adjectives, can have the effect of a "get-passive" in English or of middles or reflexives in languages which have these. The implication is that the subject/agent is either (sometimes adversely) affected by the action, and/or has no control over the action of the verb. Note also resultant state -어 있다 is in the state of resulting from, is done.
Here: her hair was hanging down/out

“집 나온 지 일 년이 넘었대."
Pattern: -대
Pattern Gloss: Colloquial abbreviation of -다고 해 for hearsay reporting: they say that QUOTE or I hear that QUOTE.
Here: they say it has been a year since she left home

병원에 와서야 집에 전화를 해서
Pattern: -어서야
Pattern Gloss: only after/only once having done (sequential -어서 followed by (이)야 only if).
Here: only after getting to the hospital did she call home, and then

“열여덟이래요.”
Pattern: -(이)래요
Pattern Gloss: Colloquial abbreviation of indirect quotative -(이)라고 해요 for hearsay reporting: they say that QUOTE, I hear that QUOTE.
Here: “They say she's 18."

한 생명을 책임지기에는, 그 생명을 버리기에는 너무 어린 나이
Pattern: -기에 (너무) 어리다
Pattern Gloss: is too young for...-ing/too young to...
Here: an age too young to take responsibility for a life, to throw away that life

그러안을수록
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ수록
Pattern Gloss: the more (better, bigger, etc.)...the more...
Here: a child who, the more one held it close, the more fiercely it kept crying

그악스레
Pattern: -스레
Pattern Gloss: = -스러이 like, as; in a blah-blah-blah kind of way or manner (adverb derived from -스럽다).
Here: a child who, the more one held it close, the more fiercely it kept crying

울어대는 아이
Pattern: -어 댄다
Pattern Gloss: (does) terribly, awfully, a lot, like mad/anything (gives iterative and/or emphatic force to a preceding verb infinitive).
Here: a child who, the more one held it close, the more fiercely it kept crying

머릿속을 빠갤 듯
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ 듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: like, as, giving the appearance of...; appearing (to be), looking (like); seeming as if; as if/though. On the future/prospective modifier, as here, the meaning is giving the appearance that it might or will ...; seeming as if/though it might.
Here: as if it [the sound of the child’s crying] might split open the inside of her head

파고들어서 아이를 버렸노라고
Pattern: -노라고
Pattern Gloss: making the ceremonious claim that ... (for first-person claims treated as somewhat dubious or otherwise scorn-worthy by the person reporting the claim). In other words, the -노라 is in origin a first-person (I, we ceremonious form for declarations and proclamations (I hereby do solemnly blah-blah-blah, though perhaps not quite so heavy), quoted here with -고 by somebody else with the implication that the quoter doesn't quite buy it.
Here: declaring that she had abandoned the child because the sound of the child‘s crying had dug inside her as if it might split open the inside of her head

죽을 줄을 몰랐다고 태연스레 말했다는 남자.
Pattern: -스레
Pattern Gloss: = -스러이 like, as; in a blah-blah-blah kind of way or manner (adverb derived from -스럽다).
Here: the man, about whom they said he had spoken calmly that he didn‘t realize it would die

알 수 없다는 듯 서늘한 얼굴.
Pattern: -다는 듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: Based on -는 듯(이) like, as, giving the appearance of… ; appearing (to be), looking (like); seeming as if; as if/though plus an abbreviated indirect quotation in -다[고 하-], so: as if to say…
Here: a cool face that was if to say ‘no idea’

긴 꿈에서 방금 깨어난 듯 몽롱한 두 눈.
Pattern: -(으)ㄴ 듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: With 듯(이) as post-modifier (cf. also -(으)ㄹ 듯(이), -는 듯(이))(seem) as if has done... ; (seem) as if it did.... Similar in function to BASE + 듯(이), but you should keep them distinct.
Here: two sleep eyes that were as if they had just woken up from a long sleep

아이를 가졌다는 지수의 말
Pattern: -다는
Pattern Gloss: From the indirect quotation pattern in -다[고 하]는.
Here: Chisu’s words to the effect that she was pregnant

마치 “...” 하는 듯
Pattern: 마치 …-는 듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: just as (if) doing...
Here: just as if saying "..."

말릴 겨를도 없이 아래층으로 달려 내려가
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ 겨를(도) 없이
Pattern Gloss: without so much as a spare moment to... ;without a chance to ...
Here: without even giving her a chance to stop him he had race down to the story below and

"엄마, 저 결혼해야겠어요. 지수가 애를 가졌대요."
Pattern: -대(요)
Pattern Gloss: Colloquial abbreviation of -다고 해(요) for hearsay reporting: they say that QUOTE or I hear that QUOTE.
Here: "Mom, I'm going to have to get married. Chisu says she's pregnant."

너무나 어울리지 않아
Pattern: -(이)나
Pattern Gloss: as many as, as much (showing that the speaker finds the amount/extent to be more than expected). See also 꽤나 rather, quite.
Here: was so out of character with

"그 책, 좀 빌릴까요?“
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ까(요)?
Pattern Gloss: tentative question: could it be that...? is it perhaps the case that...? Might I/we...?
Here: Mind if I borrow that book?

어디서 본 사람일까.
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ까(요)?
Pattern Gloss: tentative question: could it be that ...? is it perhaps the case that...? Might I/we ...?
Here: Where was it I had seen him [I wonder]?

읽다가 접어둔 책
Pattern: -다(가)
Pattern Gloss: does/ did (is/was) and then; does/did (is/was) but; when emphasizing a shift of place, purpose, direction, benefit, etc. in the action occurring.
Here: a book that I had been reading for a while and then put down

일정대로
Pattern: NOUN 대로
Pattern Gloss: as, just as, just as it is (was); in accordance with NOUN.
Here: according to the schedule/itinerary

한 시간 거리라는 산호섬
Pattern: -(이)라는
Pattern Gloss: ← -(이)라[고 하]는 used to modify a noun.
Here: a coral island that they say is one hour away

산호섬으로 떠난 참이었다
Pattern: -(으)ㄴ 참이었다
Pattern Gloss: had just finished ...-ing; it was the juncture when something had only just happened.
Here: they had just departed for the coral island

지수의 대답에는 관심이 없는 듯
Pattern: -는 듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: as (if) doing...
Here: as if he had no interest in Chisu's reply

깜짝 놀랄 만큼 날카로웠다.
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ 만큼
Pattern Gloss: 1) to the extent that will do/be (= -(으)ㄹ 정도(로)); 2) enough to do, as much as necessary for doing.
Here: was surprisingly sharp

누구라도
Pattern: -(이)라도
Pattern Gloss: (1) even if (it be); (2) just, (or the) like (= 이나); or even; any, some. Here: somebody or other.
Here: if somebody/anybody ever so much as ['just'] bumped into him

부딪치기만 하면
Pattern: -기만 하면
Pattern Gloss: no sooner does it/one do or be, than... ; all one/it has to do or be is... (and then some result).
Here: if somebody/anybody ever so much as ['just'] bumped into him

싸움을 걸 듯한 눈빛.
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ 듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: giving the appearance that it might or will...; seeming as if/though it might. Note that with ㄹ-extending verbs like 걸다 here, the ㄹ in 걸 듯 is the modifier on an ㄹ-dropped base, not the ㄹ of the verb base.
Here: a look in his eyes that was as if he might pick a fight

어제 남편 일행과 골프를 쳤다는 사람이었다.
Pattern: -다는
Pattern Gloss: From the indirect quotation pattern in -다[고 하]는.
Here: it was the man about whom they said her husband and his pals had played golf with yesterday

진작 알아봤어야 했는데.
Pattern: 진작 ...-었어야 했다
Pattern Gloss: should have done from the very beginning; should have... in the first place/from the get-go.
Here: I should have recognized him [in the first place = 진작]

남자를 흘끔거리며
Pattern: -거린다
Pattern Gloss: usually on mimetics: does repeatedly/continuously; does and does; keeps doing, does on and on, does (keeps doing) it away; does again and again, does over and over again.
Here: glaring at him

투덜대는 일행에게 남편이 말했었다.
Pattern: Mimetic + -대다
Pattern Gloss: = Mimetic + -거린다 does repeatedly/continuously; does and does; keeps doing, does on and on, does (keeps doing) it away; does again and again, does over and over again. Note also the ‘double past’ in -었었- which tends to position an event more remotely in the past than just -었-.
Here: said her husband to his pals who were grumbling and glaring at him

멤버가 모자라 우연히 합류한 남자
Pattern: -아(서)
Pattern Gloss: Naked infinitive in -아(서).
Here: the man, who had happened to join in with their group because they were short a person

남편 일행은 적잖은 돈을 앗긴 모양이었다.
Pattern: -(으)ㄴ 모양이다
Pattern Gloss: gives the looks of doing/having done, appears to be doing/have done.
Here: it seemed her husband and his group had been deprived of/had lost a considerable amount of money

낚시 도구를 챙기느라 분주했던 남편
Pattern: -느라(고) 분주하다
Pattern Gloss: be busy/preoccupied ...ing. Also: -었던, I.e., the retrospective modifier -던 on a past base. By itself, the -던 means... that has been observed to (be or do); ... that has been doing, ... that used to do; ...that was, ...that used to be. Combined with the past base, the sense is of more complete-and-done and/or more remote in the past.
Here: her husband, who had been busy preparing the fishing tackle

혼자 남아 있겠다는 지수
Pattern: -겠다는
Pattern Gloss: ← -겠다[고 하]는 (contracted indirect quotation).
Here: Chisu, who said she would stay behind by herself

딴 세상 사람처럼 바라보다 떠났다.
Pattern: -다(가)
Pattern Gloss: does/did and THEN; does/did BUT (emphasizing a shift or displacement in the action).
Here: stared at her for a while like a person from another world and then left

한차례 수영을 한 듯
Pattern: -(으)ㄴ 듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: 듯(이) as post-modifier (cf. also -(으)ㄹ 듯(이), -는 듯(이)) (seem) as if has done... ; (seem) as if it did.... Similar in function to BASE + 듯(이), but you should keep them distinct.
Here: as if he had just been swimming for a while

모래들이 그의 젖은 다리, 긴 털 사이에 달라붙어 있었다.
Pattern: -어 있다
Pattern Gloss: resultant state: is in the state of resulting from, is done.
Here: grains of sand were stuck to his wet legs, in between the long hairs

얼굴을 덮기에는 조금 딱딱했던지
Pattern: -기에 딱딱하다
Pattern Gloss: be too hard to... ; be too hard for ...-ing. Also: -었던지 perhaps/maybe because it had been the case that...
Here: perhaps because it had been a bit hard for covering his face

남자가 책을 들어보고는 잠깐 이마를 찡그렸다.
Pattern: -고는
Pattern Gloss: Placing the 는 after -고 forces the and [then]... reading of -고, as opposed to the and [also]... reading. In other words, it means when..., ...then; upon doing, but emphasizing the consequence.
Here: the man lifted up the book and then frowned briefly

몸을 정오의 태양 아래 고스란히 내맡긴 채
Pattern: -(으)ㄴ 채(로)
Pattern Gloss: just as it is or did, (in) the original state of....
Here: with his body consigned /given over completely under the midday sun

남자는 미동도 하지 않았다.
Pattern: VN도 하지 않는다
Pattern Gloss: Equivalent to VN하지도 않는다 doesn't even...
Here: the man did not even budge

생명 없는 물체인 양
Pattern: -(으)ㄴ 양
Pattern Gloss: abbreviation of -(으)ㄴ 모양 appearance, shape, form of being; signs, indications of being; as if to, in a manner suggestive of...
Here: as if he were an inert/lifeless object

군데군데 비늘이 벗겨진 채
Pattern: -(으)ㄴ 채(로)
Pattern Gloss: just as it is or did, (in) the original state of....
Here: with its scales peeled off here and there in place

고르게 오르락내리락거리는 남자의 가슴
Pattern: -(으)락 ...-(으)락
Pattern Gloss: alternating between two different actions or conditions. Here the alternating patterns or conditions are treated as one large mimetic and suffixed with -거린다.
Here: the man's chest, rising up and down evenly

어느 순간 멎을 것만 같아
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ 것만 같다
Pattern Gloss: all it seemed like was...; it definitely seems that something will likely happen or be the case. The addition of particle 만 to the seem pattern in Modifier + 것 같다 lends an air of absolute certainly and insistence to the construction. Also: naked infinitive in -아: 같아(서).
Here: seemed exactly as if/seemed for certain that it might stop one moment

잔모래들을 하얗게 표백시키며 부서지고
Pattern: VN시키-
Pattern Gloss: hypertransivitized equivalent of just VN하-. Also: -(으)며 for -(으)면서 while, at the same time, (doing) simultaneously.
Here: crushed and bleached white the fine grains of sand

이따금 생각났다는 듯
Pattern: -었다는 듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: Based on -는 듯(이) like, as, giving the appearance of… ; appearing (to be), looking (like); seeming as if; as if/though plus an abbreviated indirect quotation in -었다[고 하-], so: as if to say…
Here: now and then as if to say it had just come to mind

파도가 모래톱을 조심스레 핥다 물러가곤 했다.
Pattern: -스레
Pattern Gloss: = -스러이 like, as; in a blah-blah-blah kind of way or manner (adverb derived from -스럽다).
Here: the waves would carefully lick the tops of the sand then retreat

작은 병들이 몇 개인가 담긴 플라스틱 바구니
Pattern: WH …-(이)ㄴ가
Pattern Gloss: Question word + counter -(이)ㄴ가 how many was it? -- I'm not sure. Hence: a few or so.
Here: a plastic basket containing a few little bottles or so

바구니를 들어 보이며 여자가 물었다.
Pattern: 들어(서) 보이며
Pattern Gloss: Serialized verb construction: 들어(서) 보이며 lifting it up and showing it to her. Also: -(으)며 for -(으)면서 while, at the same time, (doing) simultaneously.
Here: lifted up the basket and showed it to me as she asked

여자에게서는 희미한 향수...냄새가 났다.
Pattern: 에게서
Pattern Gloss: from.
Here: a faint scent of perfume came from the woman

지수가 몇 번인가 고개를 흔들었지만
Pattern: WH …-(이)ㄴ가
Pattern Gloss: Question word + counter + -(이)ㄴ가 how many was it? I'm not sure. Hence: a few or so; several or so.
Here: Chisu shook her head 'no' several times, but

여자는 똑같은 말을 반복하며 서 있었다.
Pattern: -(으)며
Pattern Gloss: For -(으)면서 while, at the same time, (doing) simultaneously. Also: resultant state in -어 있다.
Here: the woman stood there, repeating the exact same words

여자의 눈이 지수를 뚫어져라 쳐다보았다.
Pattern: -어라
Pattern Gloss: adverb grammaticalized from the command form in -어라. Cf. also “죽어라[고]!” “Die!” grammaticalized as an emphatic adverb: with all one's might.
Here: the woman's eyes stared at Chisu like they would bore through her

어느 기름으로 적셔낸 듯
Pattern: -(으)ㄴ 듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: 듯(이) as post-modifier (cf. also -(으)ㄹ 듯(이), -는 듯(이)) (seem) as if has done... ; (seem) as if it did.... Similar in function to BASE + 듯(이), but you should keep them distinct.
Here: as if moistened with some oil

반들거리는 눈동자.
Pattern: -거린다
Pattern Gloss: with mimetic: does repeatedly/continuously; does and does; keeps doing, does on and on, does (keeps doing) it away; does again and again, does over and over again.
Here: glinting pupils

지수 쪽에서 먼저 눈을 돌리자
Pattern: -자 (마자)
Pattern Gloss: Plain base + -자 (마자) as soon as, when, no sooner than.
Here: as soon as Chisu ['Chisu's side'] was the first to avert her eyes,

여자는 승낙을 받아냈다는 듯
Pattern: -었다는 듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: Based on -는 듯(이) like, as, giving the appearance of… ; appearing (to be), looking (like); seeming as if; as if/though plus an abbreviated indirect quotation in -었다[고 하-], so: as if to say…
Here: the woman, as if to say that she had secured permission

바구니를 내려놓고
Pattern: -어 놓는다
Pattern Gloss: A) does for later, does in advance, gets it ready before hand. B) does it and leaves it that way, does it for now.
Here: put down her basket, and

여자는 장난감 다루듯이 지수의 몸을 돌리고
Pattern: -듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: Martin treats this as an abbreviation of the pattern where 듯 is used as a post-modifier, i.e. -(으)ㄴ 듯(이), -(으)ㄹ 듯(이), -는 듯(이); but in any case you should keep them distinct. In the pattern here, -듯 attaches directly to the base without any intervening modifier.
Here: the woman turned Chisu's body around like handling a toy, and

여자의 손을 따라
Pattern: NOUN(을) 따라(서)
Pattern Gloss: in accordance with, in conformity to (with), according to NOUN. Usually the NOUN is marked with 에, but it can also be marked with the object particle, as here.
Here: in accordance with/following the woman's hands

지수의 몸 안, 어느 한쪽에 숨어 있던 무언가가
Pattern: -어 있다
Pattern Gloss: resultant state: is in the state of resulting from, is done. Also: WH …-(이)ㄴ가 from copula modifier -인 plus postmodifier 가 in a function similar to quasi-particle -(이)나: some ~ or other.
Here: something, some je ne sais quois, that had been hiding inside Chisu's body, to one side

차례로 빠져나가는 듯
Pattern: -는 듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: as (if) doing…
Here: as if falling away, one by one in turn

연한 뼈들은 허물어진 채
Pattern: -(으)ㄴ 채(로)
Pattern Gloss: just as it is or did, (in) the original state of....
Here: her soft bones crushed/demolished, as they were

몸이 녹아내려
Pattern: 아(서)
Pattern Gloss: Serial verb construction: 녹아(서) 내려.
Here: her body melted down [in relaxation]

자신이 사라질 것만 같은 기억,
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ 것만 같다
Pattern Gloss: all it seemed like was... ; it definitely seems that something will likely happen or be the case. The addition of particle 만 to the seem pattern in Modifier + 것 같다 lends an air of absolute certainly and insistence to the construction.
Here: the memories of it seeming for certain that she would disappear

발목을 억세게 움켜잡았다 놓기를 반복하던 손길
Pattern: -다(가)
Pattern Gloss: does/ did (is/was) and then; does/did (is/was) but; when emphasizing a shift of place, purpose, direction, benefit, etc. in the action occurring. Here on a past base. Also: VERB-기(를) 반복한다 does VERB over and over again; repeats VERBing.
Here: his touch, which had repeatedly grabbed her ankle firmly and released it

손길을 멈추지 않은 채
Pattern: -(으)ㄴ 채(로)
Pattern Gloss: just as it is or did, (in) the original state of....
Here: without stopping the motion of his hands

떨어질 때의 아찔함
Pattern: -(으)ㅁ
Pattern Gloss: the act (or fact) of doing or being.
Here: the dizziness when she had fallen

그 믿을 수 없을 만큼 강렬하던 통증
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ 만큼
Pattern Gloss: 1) to the extent that will do/be (= -(으)ㄹ 정도(로)); 2) enough to do, as much as necessary for doing.
Here: the unbelievably intense pain

남자의 손가락을 타고 신기하게도 사라지고
Pattern: -게도
Pattern Gloss:  -ly enough. Cf. other adverbs in -게도: 유감스럽게도 unfortunately, regrettably, 불행하게도 sad to say, unfortunately.
Here: rode up the man's fingers then disappeared miraculously

발을 디뎌
Pattern: -어(서)
Pattern Gloss: Naked infinitive in -어(서).
Here: get on her feet

일어설 수 없을 듯한 나른함
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ 듯하다
Pattern Gloss: seem pattern in modifier + -듯 하다 ( i.e., -(으)ㄴ 듯하다, -(으)ㄹ 듯하다, -는 듯하다) is like, is as (if) is like, is as (if). Note also substantive -(으)ㅁ on a plain base: the act (or fact) of doing or being.
Here: a languor that seemed like she wouldn't be able to get on her feet and stand up

 “뼈가 상한 것은 아닌가 봐요.”
Pattern: -(으)ㄴ가 보다
Pattern Gloss: seems to be...
Here: "Seems the bone isn't damaged."

아, 무슨 대학 운동선수라 했던가.
Pattern: -던가(요)
Pattern Gloss: retrospective question, often asked aloud of oneself without the 요: what had been the case... I wonder?
Here: Oh -- what sport was it that he was playing in college?

이야기를 들었을 뿐 처음 보는 주인집 아들이었다.
Pattern: -었을 뿐(이다)
Pattern Gloss: did nothing but; only did, constantly did; all it/one did/was is....
Here: I had only ever heard of him -- it is was the first time I had seen the landlady's son

영화, 네가 있어 다행이다.
Pattern: -어서 다행이다
Pattern Gloss: good thing that... ; lucky thing that... (with naked infinitive in –어).
Here: Yŏnghwa, good thing you're here.

놀랐잖니.
Pattern: -잖니
Pattern Gloss: Rhetorical Retort in -잖- come on, isn't it (actually) the case that...? and Plain Question -니?
Here: This really gave me a scare, you know!

얼음주머니를 들고 오며 말했다.
Pattern: -(으)며
Pattern Gloss: For -(으)면서 while, at the same time, (doing) simultaneously.
Here: she said, carrying in an ice pack

옛날 영화를 떠올리듯
Pattern: -듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: Martin treats this as an abbreviation of the pattern where 듯 is used as a post-modifier, i.e. -(으)ㄴ 듯(이), -(으)ㄹ 듯(이), -는 듯(이); but in any case you should keep them distinct. In the pattern here, -듯attaches directly to the base without any intervening modifier.
Here: as if recalling an old film

아들이 돌아오자 그녀는
Pattern: -자 (마자)
Pattern Gloss: Plain base + -자 (마자) as soon as, when, no sooner than.
Here: as soon as her son entered, she

역사책에서 빠져나온 듯한 근엄한 얼굴
Pattern: -(으)ㄴ 듯하다
Pattern Gloss: 듯(이) as post-modifier (cf. also -(으)ㄹ 듯(이), -는 듯(이)) (seem) as if has done... ; (seem) as if it did.... Similar in function to BASE + 듯(이), but you should keep them distinct.
Here: stern faces that seemed as if they had fallen out of history books

매일 마주하기란 (간단한 일이 아니었다.)
Pattern: -(이)란
Pattern Gloss: Generic topic in -(이)란 for (이)라고 하는 것은 that is (called), as for (the one that is called) ... Used to make topics, especially in generic pronouncements or universalizing/generalizing statements. Here as -기: -기란 as for ...-ing; when it comes to ...-ing
Here: facing them every day (was not an easy matter)

자신을 되돌아볼 좋은 기회라고 생각해라.
Pattern: Apposite modifiers
Pattern Gloss: Apposite modifiers (two modifiers on one head noun): 자신을 되돌아볼 기회 + 좋은 기회.
Here: think of it as a good opportunity to reflect on yourselves

십오 년 만에 딸을 한국에 보내며
Pattern: DURATION 만에
Pattern Gloss: (only) after (such and such) a time/interval. Also: -(으)며 for -(으)면서 while, at the same time, (doing) simultaneously.
Here: sending his daughter to Korea for the first time in 15 years

“백 일 동안의 고국 바로 알기”
Pattern: -기
Pattern Gloss: nominalizer -기 (turns the preceding phrase into one big noun).
Here: "A correct understanding of the homeland in 100 days"

그녀의 방에 들어온 아버지는 마리화나를 발견하자마자
Pattern: -자 (마자)
Pattern Gloss: Plain base + -자 (마자) as soon as, when, no sooner than.
Here: as soon as her father, who had entered her room, discovered the marijuana

이 썩은 냄새! 라고 소리쳤었다
Pattern: -(이)라고
Pattern Gloss: Verbatim quotation in -(이)라고. Also: 'double past' in -었었-. The 'double past' tends to position an event more remotely in the past than just -었-.
Here: he had yelled, "This rotten smell!"

냄새를 씻어 낼 수 있다고
Pattern: -어 낸다
Pattern Gloss: does all the way (to the very end, thoroughly, through and through).
Here: that it could wash away the smell

냄새를 씻어 낼 수 있다고 믿었던 것일까.
Pattern: -었던
Pattern Gloss: the retrospective modifier -던 on a past base. By itself, the -던 means ...that has been observed to (be or do); ... that has been doing, ...that used to do; ...that was, ...that used to be. Combined with the past base, the sense is of more complete-and-done and/or more remote in the past.
Here: was it perhaps the case that he had believed it could wash away the smell?

아버지로서는 지수의 방
Pattern: NOUN(으)로서(는)
Pattern Gloss: as, for, in the capacity of; being NOUN.
Here: For her father/as far as her father was concerned, Chisu's room

그녀의 삶 전체가 썩은 냄새를 풍기는 것이었는지도 몰랐다.
Pattern: -었는지도 모른다
Pattern Gloss: perhaps/maybe it had been the case that...
Here: it may well have been the case that her entire life was giving off a rotten smell

홀로 지수 자매를 키우느라 황혼을 맞은 남자.
Pattern: -느라(고)
Pattern Gloss: what with doing; with the idea to do, with the intention of doing.
Here: a man who had entered the twilight of his life struggling to raise Chisu and her sister on his own

대형 편의점으로 만들기까지
Pattern: -기까지
Pattern Gloss: until (even) [the point when] it does.
Here: until he had built it into a large-scale convenience store

지쳐 쓰러질 듯한 얼굴
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ 듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: On the future/prospective modifier, as here, the meaning is giving the appearance that it might or will...; seeming as if/though it might.
Here: a face that seemed as if it would collapse from exhaustion

떠듬거리는 영어로
Pattern: -거린다
Pattern Gloss: with mimetics: does repeatedly/continuously; does and does; keeps doing, does on and on, does (keeps doing) it away; does again and again, does over and over again.
Here: in his stammering/faltering English

늘 돌아오는 곳이라는 듯
Pattern: -다는 듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: like, as, giving the appearance of... ; appearing (to be), looking (like); seeming as if; as if/though, built on an abbreviated indirect quotation in -(이)라[고 하-], so: as if to say…
Here: as if to say that this was a place she always came back to

처연한 걸음으로 집으로 들어왔다.
Pattern: (으)로
Pattern Gloss: Instrumental: with/by means of. Also directional (으)로: to/in the direction of.
Here: entered the house with sorrowful steps

아무런 조심스러움도 없는 여자
Pattern: 아무런 + Negative
Pattern Gloss: Modifier form of ㅎ-irregular verb 아무렇다 be any old way, any such way. Also: substantive -(으)ㅁ: the act (or fact) of doing or being.
Here: a woman with absolutely no caution/discretion

지수 자매를 향해
Pattern: NOUN(을) 향해(서)
Pattern Gloss: in the direction of NOUN.
Here: to Chisu and her sister

아버지는 단지 이렇게만 말했다.
Pattern: -게만
Pattern Gloss: in this manner/way only.
Here: This was all that their father said [to Chisu and her sister]

어떤 궁금증을 펼칠 겨를 없이
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ 겨를(도) 없이
Pattern Gloss: without so much as a spare moment to... ; without a chance to ...
Here: without even a chance to give vent to any sort of concerns

여자는 아침이면
Pattern: -(이)면
Pattern Gloss: When it comes/came to...; As for...
Here: In the mornings

아버지와 함께 나갔다가
Pattern: 다(가)
Pattern Gloss: transferentive: does/ did (is/was) and then; does/did (is/was) but; when emphasizing a shift of place, purpose, direction, benefit, etc. in the action occurring.
Here: In the mornings, the woman would go out with their father, and then [come back with an armload of supper fixings]

멀건 스프와 마른 빵 일색이던 식탁
Pattern: ㅎ-irregular verb
Pattern Gloss: Modifier from 멀건 from ㅎ-irregular verb 멀겋다.
Here: their supper table, which had been the same old clear broth and dried bread

저 여자는 먹지 않고도 살 수 있는 사람인가 하는 궁금증뿐이었다.
Pattern: -고도
Pattern Gloss: More or less equivalent to -어도, but with the nuance of even after doing, even after having done; and yet, but, while, though. Here: It was only the concern as to whether the woman was a person who could live without even eating

마른 빨래를 개키는 것을 끝으로...자신의 방으로 돌아가면
Pattern: -는 것을 끝으로
Pattern Gloss: with ...-ing as the last thing; wrapping up with ... -ing.
Here: when she would return to her room... after finishing by folding the dried laundry

아침이면 제 방에서 말짱한 얼굴로 나오겠지만
Pattern: -(이)면
Pattern Gloss: When it comes/came to...; As for ...
Here: she'll come out of her room in the morning with an innocent face, but

뇌관을 가진 폭탄과도 같았다.
Pattern: NOUN과도 같다
Pattern Gloss: is even~also like/similar to NOUN.
Here: it was also/even like a bomb with a detonation cap attached

세상은 결코 단 한 차례도 고요에 빠진 적이 없는 것 같았다.
Pattern: 결코 + Negative
Pattern Gloss: presages/flags an upcoming negative verb: not ... at all.
Here: It seemed the world had never even once fallen into peace and quiet

살아 있는 누군가가 움직이고 있었다.
Pattern: -어 있다
Pattern Gloss: resultant state. Also WH …-(이)ㄴ가 from copula modifier –인 plus postmodifier 가 in a function similar to quasi-particle -(이)나: some ~ or other.
Here: some living person was moving

그 소리들을 향해
Pattern: NOUN(을) 향해(서)
Pattern Gloss: in the direction of NOUN.
Here: in the direction of those sounds

귀를 열고 있노라면
Pattern: -노라면
Pattern Gloss: what with the process of …-ing; because of the long process of …-ing. Same as -느라면, but with a tinge of implication that the subject of the verb is somewhat pretentious and/or unjustified to see the process as such a big deal.
Here: when she was doing her best to open up her ears

이야기를 나누는 것조차 본 적이 없는데.
Pattern: 조차
Pattern Gloss: even, too, to boot, in addition, into the bargain.
Here: I've never once even seen father talking with her

조바심으로 잠들지 못하던 지수
Pattern: -던
Pattern Gloss: which used to... ; which was in the habit of...
Here: Chisu, who was unable to sleep because of her fretfulness

깜박 잠에 빠졌나 싶을 때면
Pattern: Plain Style Quote + 싶다
Pattern Gloss: it feels like, as if maybe; think to oneself that... ; wonder to oneself whether... Note that, while the clause in front of 싶다 looks like and feels like a quote, you cannot put a quotative -고 after it. Also: -(으)ㄹ 때면 ← -(으)ㄹ 때이면whenever it gets to be the time when...
Here: Just when she thought she had fallen asleep

그 여자를 볼 수 있는 곳은 그 두 곳뿐이었다.
Pattern: 뿐
Pattern Gloss: only, merely, just, alone (+ copula -이다).
Here: the places where she could see the woman were just those two

어느 날부터인가
Pattern: WH …-(이)ㄴ가
Pattern Gloss: some ~ or other.
Here: from one day (can't remember when it was)

여자는 출근하기를 그만두고
Pattern: -기(를) 그만둔다
Pattern Gloss: quits ...-ing.
Here: the woman stopped going to work in the morning

친구의 전화를 간섭하는가 하면 (저녁 외출을 되물었다.)
Pattern: VERB1-는가 하면 VERB2
Pattern Gloss: not only VERB1 but also VERB2. Literally, this works out as If you ask me whether VERB1 is the case, then VERB2 is also the case.
Here: not only did she interfere with phone calls from her friends (she also pried into her comings and goings in the evening) [lit.: if you ask me 'does she interfere with phone calls from my friends?' (she also...)]

마치 한 꾸리의 실타래가 풀리듯
Pattern: 마치... (modifier) + 듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: like, as, giving the appearance of... ; appearing (to be), looking (like); seeming as if; as if/though. The 이 of 듯이 is optional. 마치, like 흡사, signals that a 듯이 or 처럼 is coming up.
Here: just like a skein of thread unravels

자신들을 친친 감아나간다는 것을
Pattern: -(으)ㄴ다는 것
Pattern Gloss: the putative or alleged fact that... (here as object). In origin, from the indirect quotation pattern in –(으)ㄴ다[고 하]는 것, etc.,
Here: the fact that it was gradually winding around them and binding them

먼저 알게 된 것도 지수의 언니였다.
Pattern: -(으)ㄴ 것
Pattern Gloss: the fact that... did; the fact of having done something
Here: likewise, the one who was the first to realize [that...] was Chisu's sister

숨이 막혀
Pattern: -어(서)
Pattern Gloss: Naked infinitive.
Here: it was so stifling that…

견딜 수 없노라고 했다.
Pattern: -노라고
Pattern Gloss: making the ceremonious claim that... (for first-person claims treated as somewhat dubious or otherwise scorn-worthy by the person reporting the claim). In other words, the -노라 is in origin a first-person (I, we) ceremonious form for declarations and proclamations (I hereby do solemnly blah-blah-blah, though perhaps not quite so heavy), quoted here with -고 by somebody else with the implication that the quoter doesn't quite buy it.
Here: she reported/declared/proclaimed that [it was so stifling] she couldn't bear it

지수의 나날을 견디게 한 것은
Pattern: -게 한다
Pattern Gloss: causative: lets/allows (somebody) to...
Here: the thing that allowed Chisu to endure these days upon end

오히려 그 견딜 수 없음이었다.
Pattern: -(으)ㅁ
Pattern Gloss: the act (or fact) of doing or being.
Here: was actually their unbearability

누군가 울부짖듯, 흐느끼는 듯
Pattern: -듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: Martin treats this as an abbreviation of the pattern where 듯 is used as a post-modifier, i.e. -(으)ㄴ 듯(이), -(으)ㄹ 듯(이), -는 듯(이); but in any case you should keep them distinct. In the pattern here, -듯attaches directly to the base without any intervening modifier.
Here: sounds as if somebody were wailing, sobbing, wobbling and collapsing

흐느적거리며 허물어지는 듯한 소리들
Pattern: -거린다
Pattern Gloss: with mimetics: does repeatedly/continuously; does and does; keeps doing, does on and on, does (keeps doing) it away; does again and again, does over and over again. Also –는 듯하다: as (if) doing…
Here: sounds as if somebody were wailing, sobbing, wobbling and collapsing

그녀에게는 오랜 친구와도 같았다.
Pattern: NOUN과도 같다
Pattern Gloss: is even~also like/similar to NOUN.
Here: they were also like old friends to her

발목이 나아
Pattern: -아(서)
Pattern Gloss: Naked infinitive (here from 낫다, 나아 get better).
Here: even though her ankle had healed and she had become able to move again

다시 움직일 수 있게 되었어도
Pattern: -었어도
Pattern Gloss: even after doing, even after having done; and yet, but, while, though. I.e., concessive (even though) -어도 on a past base.
Here: even though her ankle had healed and she had become able to move again

그녀의 무료함을 덜어 주었다.
Pattern: -(으)ㅁ
Pattern Gloss: substantive: the act (or fact) of doing or being.
Here: lessened her boredom

일 년 내내 영화가 그렇듯이
Pattern: -듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: Martin treats this as an abbreviation of the seem/as if pattern where 듯 is used as a post-modifier, i.e. -(으)ㄴ 듯(이), -(으)ㄹ 듯(이), -는 듯(이); but in any case you should keep them distinct. In the pattern here, -듯 attaches directly to the base without any intervening modifier.
Here: year in and year out, just as it is in the movie(s)

공중에 매달린 그물주머니를 향해 공을 던지고
Pattern: NOUN(을) 향해(서)
Pattern Gloss: in the direction of NOUN.
Here: throwing the ball in the direction of the net suspended in mid-air

환상 때문에 잠 못 이루는 것이 자신 뿐만은 아님을 알았다.
Pattern: NOUN뿐만(은) 아니다
Pattern Gloss: is not just NOUN; is not only NOUN; is not NOUN alone. Also: -(으)ㅁ을 알았다 realized/came to know that...
Here: realized that she was not the only one could not get to sleep because of hallucinations

사는 건 말이지, 영화 같은 거야.
Pattern: NOUN은 말이지
Pattern Gloss: Used to interject or bring up a new topic. I mean -- NOUN (as topic). The 건 is contracted from 것은, just as 거야 is contracted from 것이야.
Here: I mean, living -- it's like a movie

나쁜 장면들은 내버려두면 잊혀지잖아?
Pattern: -어 진다
Pattern Gloss: Besides meaning gets to be or becomes with adjectives, can have the effect of a "get-passive" in English or of middles or reflexives in languages which have these. The implication is that the subject/agent is either (sometimes adversely) affected by the action, and/or has no control over the action of the verb. Here with the Rhetorical Retort pattern in -잖- come on, isn't it (actually) the case that... ?
Here: if you leave out the bad scenes, they get forgotten, isn't that right?

검은 갈기를 휘날리며
Pattern: -(으)며
Pattern Gloss: For -(으)면서 while, at the same time, (doing) simultaneously.
Here: letting its black mane flow/fly

말발굽에 차여
Pattern: 에
Pattern Gloss: To mark the by-phrase (agent) of a passive. The verb is 차이다, passive of 차다 kick.
Here: kicked up by the horse hooves

어지럼증을 느낄수록 지수는 더 바짝 말의 잔등에 달라붙었다.
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ수록
Pattern Gloss: increasingly with (being/doing); the more (better, bigger, etc.)…the more. This clause with -(으)ㄹ수록 can optionally be preceded by the same verb in the conditional -(으)면 form: VERB-(으)면 VERB-(으)ㄹ수록.
Here: the more she felt the dizziness, the more Chisu clung tightly to the horse's back

그 무엇도 보이지 않았다.
Pattern: WH도 + Negative
Pattern Gloss: no(body, -thing, etc.) at all. The 그 in front of 무엇 makes the whole construction more emphatic, as well as more fancy/literary.
Here: she could see nothing at all

텅 빈 굴속에 혼자 남겨진 지수
Pattern: -어 진다
Pattern Gloss: Besides meaning gets to be or becomes with adjectives, can have the effect of a "get-passive" in English or of middles or reflexives in languages which have these. The implication is that the subject/agent is either (sometimes adversely) affected by the action, and/or has no control over the action of the verb.
Here: Chisu, left all alone in an empty cave

길고도 어두운 동굴이었다.
Pattern: -고도
Pattern Gloss: more or less equivalent to -어도, but with the nuance of even after doing, even after having done; and yet, but, while, though. On a descriptive verb, as here, it can be interpreted as equivalent to -(으)면서도 while/and yet.
Here: it was a long, and [yet, at the same time] dark, cave

부스럭거리며 짐을 챙겨드는 소리가 들렸다.
Pattern: -거린다
Pattern Gloss: with mimetics: does repeatedly/continuously; does and does; keeps doing, does on and on, does (keeps doing) it away; does again and again, does over and over again.
Here: could hear the sound of rustling as somebody packed their things

“얼만지 물어보지도 않고 마사지를 시켜요?
Pattern: -(으)ㄴ지
Pattern Gloss: the uncertain fact of being; whether it is, wonder whether (how, what,…) (here paired with a question word).
Here: You order a massage without even asking how much it is?

"그러다 바가지 써요.”
Pattern: -다(가는)
Pattern Gloss: warning pattern in -다가는: if one keeps on doing then (unfortunately/bad consequence)...
Here: "Do that, and you'll get ripped off."

어느새 깨어났는지 남자가 ...
Pattern: -었는지
Pattern Gloss: oblique question in 지, here paired with question-word 어느새.
Here: she couldn't tell/Lord knows when he had woken up, but the man...

한 손으로 책을 걷으며 몸을 일으켰다.
Pattern: -(으)며
Pattern Gloss: For -(으)면서 while, at the same time, (doing) simultaneously.
Here: sat up, putting away the book with one hand

남자가 여자에게 눈을 고정시킨 채
Pattern: -(으)ㄴ 채(로)
Pattern Gloss: just as it is or did, (in) the original state of....
Here: the man, with his eyes fixed on the woman

남자의 눈길이 닿는 순간
Pattern: -는 순간
Pattern Gloss: the moment/instant one does it; as soon as...; no sooner had one done it, than...; just when/as...
Here: the moment the man's gaze touched/reached

몸을 움츠리는가 싶던 여자가 ...
Pattern: -는가 싶다
Pattern Gloss: I.e., Plain Style Quote + 싶- it feels like, as if maybe; think to oneself that... ; wonder to oneself whether... Note that, while the clause in front of 싶다 looks like and feels like a quote, you cannot put a quotative -고 after it.
Here: the woman, about whom she [Chisu] thought/felt perhaps she was flinching

돈을 받아들며 길게 한숨을 내쉬었다.
Pattern: -(으)며
Pattern Gloss: For -(으)면서 while, at the same time, (doing) simultaneously.
Here: let out a long sigh as she collected her money

단 하루도 쉬지 않았어요.
Pattern: 단 ....도 (+ negative)
Pattern Gloss: not even one...
Here: she hasn't rested even one day

"똑같이 새까만 애들이 셋이죠.”
Pattern: ㅎ-irregular verb
Pattern Gloss: Modifier form 새까만 for새까맣다 be jet-black. Note also colloquial contraction -죠 from -지요.
Here: "She has three kids just as pitch-black as she is."

모래 위를 걸어가는 여자를 보며 남자가 ...
Pattern: -(으)며
Pattern Gloss: For -(으)면서 while, at the same time, (doing) simultaneously.
Here: watching the woman walking across the top of the sand, the man...

이웃 사람 얘기하듯 말했다.
Pattern: -듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: Martin treats this as an abbreviation of the pattern where 듯 is used as a post-modifier, i.e. -(으)ㄴ 듯(이), -(으)ㄹ 듯(이), -는 듯 (이); but in any case you should keep them distinct. In the pattern here, -듯 attaches directly to the base without any intervening modifier.
Here: spoke as if talking of a neighbor

누군가 불러 주기를 기다리듯
Pattern: -듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: Martin treats this as an abbreviation of the pattern where 듯 is used as a post-modifier, i.e. -(으)ㄴ 듯(이), -(으)ㄹ 듯(이), -는 듯 (이); but in any case you should keep them distinct. In the pattern here, -듯 attaches directly to the base without any intervening modifier.
Here: as if waiting for somebody to summon her

그 자리에 꺼져들 것만 같이 작아진 여자
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ 것만 같다
Pattern Gloss: all it seemed like was... ; it definitely seems that  something will likely happen or be the case. The addition of particle 만 to the seem pattern in Modifier + 것 같- lends an air of absolute certainly and insistence to the construction.
Here: the woman, who had grown smaller, just as if she might certainly evaporate then and there on the spot

눈을 뜨기가 두려운 햇살
Pattern: -기(가) 두렵다
Pattern Gloss: be afraid to...
Here: sunbeams which made one fearful to open one's eyes

아이의 울음소리를 듣는 순간
Pattern: -는 순간
Pattern Gloss: the moment/instant one does it; as soon as...; no sooner had one done it, than... ; just when/as...
Here: the moment she heard the baby's cry

눈을 뜰 수 없을 만큼 엄습하던 두려움.
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ 만큼
Pattern Gloss: 1) to the extent that will do/be (= -(으)ㄹ 정도(로)); 2) enough to do, as much as necessary for doing. Also: substantive -(으)ㅁ: the act (or fact) of doing or being.
Here: a fear that came over her to the extent that she was unable to open her eyes

툭 건드리기만 해도
Pattern: -기만 해도
Pattern Gloss: even if one only...-es; even if one so much as just...-es.
Here: if one so much as touched them

부러질 것만 같던 손가락들
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ 것만 같다
Pattern Gloss: all it seems like is... ; it definitely seems that something will likely happen or be the case. The addition of particle 만 to the seem pattern in Modifier + 것 같다 lends an air of absolute certainly and insistence to the construction.
Here: its fingers, which seemed certain to break if one so much as touched them

손가락들이 도톰해지는 것을 보면서도
Pattern: -(으)면서도
Pattern Gloss: even while ...-ing; even whilst ...-ing.
Here: even as she watched its fingers growing more pudgy

아이가 잠들면 그대로 깨어나지 않을 것만 같은 불안감
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ 것만 같다
Pattern Gloss: all it seems like is ... ; it definitely seems that something will likely happen or be the case. The addition of particle 만 to the seem pattern in Modifier + 것 같다 lends an air of absolute certainly and insistence to the construction.
Here: a sense of unease that seemed as if it were certain that once it fell asleep, it wouldn't wake up ['just as it was']

이지러진 채 아직 제자리에 놓이지 않은 뼈마디들.
Pattern: -(으)ㄴ 채(로)
Pattern Gloss: just as it is or did, (in) the original state of....
Here: bones, still chipped, and not yet set in their places

고통 속에서도 지수는 깨어 있었다.
Pattern: -어 있다
Pattern Gloss: resultant state: is in the state of resulting from, is done.
Here: Chisu was awake within the pain, too

잠든 아이의 정수리께
Pattern: 께
Pattern Gloss: around, in the vicinity/neighborhood of, near (a place).
Here: around the crown of the sleeping child

팔딱팔딱 맥박치듯 오르내리는 두피
Pattern: -듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: Martin treats this as an abbreviation of the pattern where 듯 is used as a post-modifier, i.e. -(으)ㄴ 듯(이), -(으)ㄹ 듯(이), -는 듯 (이); but in any case you should keep them distinct. In the pattern here, -듯 attaches directly to the base without any intervening modifier.
Here: its scalp, rising up and down like the beating of a pulse

여섯 달이 지나야 비로소
Pattern: -어야 비로소
Pattern Gloss: only after/only when...[does something finally happen].
Here: only after six months had passed, did [for the first time]...

단단한 두개골을 갖게 된다던가.
Pattern: -ㄴ다던가
Pattern Gloss: ← -ㄴ다[고 하]던가 was it the case that somebody said/claimed that... (I wonder)? Usually a soliloquy form used when trying to recall something.
Here: was it the case that they said that they came to have a firm skull

누군가의 보이지 않는 손
Pattern: WH …-(이)ㄴ가
Pattern Gloss: some ~ or other (from copula modifier -인 plus postmodifier 가 in a function similar to quasi-particle -(이)나).
Here: somebody's invisible hand

아이의 영혼을 빼내갈 것만 같았다.
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ 것만 같다
Pattern Gloss: all it seems like is... ; it definitely seems that something will likely happen or be the case. The addition of particle 만 to the seem pattern in Modifier + 것 같다 lends an air of absolute certainly and insistence to the construction.
Here: it seemed certain [somebody] would snatch away the child's soul

아물지 않은 상처를 헤집고 나왔다는 사실이
Pattern: -다는 사실
Pattern Gloss: the putative/alleged fact that, abbreviated from an indirect quotation in -다[고 하]는, adnominalizated to 사실 fact. Here on a past base.
Here: the fact that it had made its way out of the unhealed wound

사실이 믿어지지 않았다.
Pattern: -어지지(가) 않는다
Pattern Gloss: (just) cannot/ wasn't -- despite or contrary to one's wishes. The -어진다 pattern implies that the action comes about naturally, and in such a way that the agent or subject has little or no control over the process of becoming.
Here: couldn't believe the fact that... [lit.: the fact just couldn't be believed]

아이는 좀처럼 울지 않았다.
Pattern: 좀처럼 + Negative
Pattern Gloss: implying frustration with one's lack of control over a situation.
Here: the child never cried/just wouldn't cry

아이는 무언가를 기다리듯
Pattern: -듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: Martin treats this as an abbreviation of the pattern where 듯 is used as a post-modifier, i.e. -(으)ㄴ 듯(이), -(으)ㄹ 듯(이), -는 듯(이); but in any case you should keep them distinct. In the pattern here, -듯 attaches directly to the base without any intervening modifier.
Here: the child as if waiting for something

엄지손가락을 빨고 얌전히 있을 뿐
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ 뿐(이다)
Pattern Gloss: nothing but, only, constantly; all it/one does/is is... Left hanging in mid-sentence like this, the overall sense is one of contrast between the clauses.
Here: just sat there well-behavedly, sucking its thumb

보채거나
Pattern: -거나
Pattern Gloss: or.
Here: [it didn't] fuss or [whine]

칭얼거리지 않았다.
Pattern: -거린다
Pattern Gloss: with mimetics: does repeatedly/continuously; does and does; keeps doing, does on and on, does (keeps doing) it away; does again and again, does over and over again.
Here: it didn't fuss [or whine]

젖을 물리다가, 기저귀를 갈다가
Pattern: -다(가)
Pattern Gloss: does/ did (is/was) and then; does/did (is/was) but; when emphasizing a shift of place, purpose, direction, benefit, etc. in the action occurring.
Here: in the middle of nursing it, in the middle of changing its diapers

잦은 딸꾹질을 멈추게 하려고
Pattern: -게 한다
Pattern Gloss: make/let/cause to do.
Here: in an attempt to make its frequent hiccuping stop

등을 토닥여주다가
Pattern: -다(가)
Pattern Gloss: does/ did (is/was) and then; does/did (is/was) but; when emphasizing a shift of place, purpose, direction, benefit, etc. in the action occurring.
Here: in the middle of tapping its back

온몸을 뻗대며 그악스레 터뜨리는 울음
Pattern: -스레
Pattern Gloss: = -스러이 like, as; in a blah-blah-blah kind of way or manner (adverb derived from -스럽다).
Here: the crying that it would burst into ferociously, extending its entire body

얼굴을 찡그릴 뿐 소리내어 울지 않았다.
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ 뿐(이다)
Pattern Gloss: nothing but, only, constantly; all it/one does/is is.... Left hanging in mid-sentence like this, the overall sense is one of contrast between the clauses.
Here: all it did was frown -- it never cried out loud

웃음소리를 내는 바람에 아이는 놀라
Pattern: -는 바람에
Pattern Gloss: (in) conjunction (with); (in) the process (of); (as a) consequence (of); (as a) result (of); impetus, momentum, influence. The upshot is often undesirable. Also: naked infinitive in -아: 놀라(서).
Here: the child startled on account of his laughing aloud

경련하듯 몸을 흔들면서도 울지 않았다.
Pattern: -듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: Martin treats this as an abbreviation of the pattern where 듯 is used as a post-modifier, i.e. -(으)ㄴ 듯(이), -(으)ㄹ 듯(이), -는 듯(이); but in any case you should keep them distinct. In the pattern here, -듯 attaches directly to the base without any intervening modifier.
Here: even when it shook, as if in spasms, it didn't cry

날이 갈수록 어두워지는 얼굴
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ수록
Pattern Gloss: increasingly with (being/doing); the more (better, bigger, etc.)… the more. This clause with -(으)ㄹ수록 can optionally be preceded by the same verb in the conditional -(으)면 form: VERB-(으)면 VERB-(으)ㄹ수록.
Here: her face that darkened as the days wore on

그에게는 산후의 정상적인 모습으로 비쳐질지도 모를 일이었다.
Pattern: -어 진다
Pattern Gloss: Besides meaning gets to be or becomes with adjectives, can have the effect of a "get-passive" in English or of middles or reflexives in languages which have these. The implication is that the subject/agent is either (sometimes adversely) affected by the action, and/or has no control over the action of the verb. Also: -(으)ㄹ지도 모른다 may/could well be the case that will ... or likely is...
Here: to him [for all she knew], it probably seemed like a normal appearance after childbirth

송곳으로 후벼파듯 배가 아팠다.
Pattern: -듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: Martin treats this as an abbreviation of the pattern where 듯 is used as a post-modifier, i.e. -(으)ㄴ 듯(이), -(으)ㄹ 듯(이), -는 듯(이); but in any case you should keep them distinct. In the pattern here, -듯 attaches directly to the base without any intervening modifier.
Here: her stomach hurt, as if somebody were gouging it with an icepick

영문을 모르겠다는 듯
Pattern: -다는 듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: like, as, giving the appearance of… ; appearing (to be), looking (like); seeming as if; as if/though, built on an abbreviated indirect quotation in -다[고 하-], thus: as if to say…
Here: as if to say he had no clue why

유산을 많이 했거나 또...
Pattern: -었거나
Pattern Gloss: or (here on a past base).
Here: if they have had a lot of abortions, or...

아이를 눕혀놓고도
Pattern: -고도
Pattern Gloss: more or less equivalent to -어도, but with the nuance of even after doing, even after having done; and yet, but, while, though.
Here: even after putting the child down [i.e., to sleep]

푹 꺼진 채 늘어진 뱃가죽.
Pattern: -(으)ㄴ 채(로)
Pattern Gloss: just as it is or did, (in) the original state of....
Here: her extended/drooping stomach flesh, totally deflated

움푹한 배꼽 속에 미처 빠져나오지 않은 무언가가
Pattern: 미처 + Negative
Pattern Gloss: (not) up to that, (not) as far as, (not) to that extent, (not) far enough, (not) early enough, (not) in time, etc. Typically indicates that a pattern signaling inability is coming up (like -(으)ㄹ 수 없- or 못 + verb).
Here: something, some je ne sai quois, inside her caved in navel that had not yet made it out

무언가가 도사리고 있는 것만 같았다.
Pattern: WH …-(이)ㄴ가
Pattern Gloss: some ~ or other. Also: -(으)ㄴ 것만 같다 all it seems like is... ; it definitely seems that something happened or is the case. The addition of particle 만 to the seem pattern in Modifier + 것 같다 lends an air of absolute certainly and insistence to the construction.
Here: it seemed for certain that something was lurking

무슨 일을 하고 있는지 모르는 채
Pattern: -는지
Pattern Gloss: the uncertain fact of doing; whether it is doing, wonder whether (how, what,…) (here paired with a question word).
Here: clueless as to what she was doing

무거운 머리를 들지 못해
Pattern: -어(서)
Pattern Gloss: Naked infinitive (해 for 해서).
Here: unable to lift her heavy head

흐느적대던 아침.
Pattern: -대다
Pattern Gloss: with mimetics: does repeatedly/continuously; does and does; keeps doing, does on and on, does (keeps doing) it away; does again and again, does over and over.
Here: mornings when she wavered/wobbled, …

기저귀를 개키고 있는가 하면 (... 저녁을 짓고 있기도 했다.)
Pattern: VERB1-는가 하면 (VERB2)
Pattern Gloss: not only VERB1 but also VERB2. Literally, this works out as If you ask me whether VERB1 is the case, then VERB2 is also the case. Also: -기도 한다 also or even does.
Here: not only was she folding diapers (...she was also preparing supper) [lit.: if you ask me 'was she folding diapers', she was also...]

시트를 걷어낸 기억이 없는데도
Pattern: -는데도 (불구하고)
Pattern Gloss: in spite of the fact that... .
Here: even though she had no memory of stripping the sheets

저녁을 짓고 있기도 했다.
Pattern: -기도 한다
Pattern Gloss: also or even does.
Here: she was also preparing supper

막무가내로
Pattern: (으)로
Pattern Gloss: Instrumental, here on a Sino-Korean holophrase (막무가내 莫無可奈).
Here: in the style of 'can't do anything about it'

지수는 어찌할 바를 모른 채
Pattern: -(으)ㄴ 채(로)
Pattern Gloss: just as it is or did, (in) the original state of....
Here: Chisu, clueless as to how to react/what to do

자신을 학대했던 그녀로서는
Pattern: NOUN(으)로서(는)
Pattern Gloss: as, for, in the capacity of; being NOUN.
Here: for her, who had tormented herself

아이가 건강하다는 사실
Pattern: -다는 사실
Pattern Gloss: the putative/alleged fact that, abbreviated from an indirect quotation in -다[고 하]는, adnominalizated to 사실 fact.
Here: the fact that her child was healthy

감히 누려서는 안 될 행운처럼 여겨지는 것이었다.
Pattern: -어서는 안 된다
Pattern Gloss: one must not do, one shouldn't do. Also -어 진다: besides meaning gets to be or becomes with adjectives, can have the effect of a "get-passive" in English or of middles or reflexives in languages which have these. The implication is that the subject/agent is either (sometimes adversely) affected by the action, and/or has no control over the action of the verb.
Here: it was the case that it was considered by her like/as some good fortune that she dare not enjoy

그 믿어지지 않는 행운
Pattern: -어 진다
Pattern Gloss: Besides meaning gets to be or becomes with adjectives, can have the effect of a "get-passive" in English or of middles or reflexives in languages which have these. The implication is that the subject/agent is either (sometimes adversely) affected by the action, and/or has no control over the action of the verb.
Here: this stroke of good fortune that she couldn't bring herself to believe

무언가 엄청난 일이
Pattern: WH …-(이)ㄴ가
Pattern Gloss: some ~ or other.
Here: some incredible thing

잠든 아이를 들여다보며
Pattern: -(으)며
Pattern Gloss: For -(으)면서 while, at the same time, (doing) simultaneously.
Here: as she peered/gazed at the sleeping child

그 작은 손을 잡아보고, 또 잡아보곤 했다.
Pattern: -곤 한다
Pattern Gloss: habitual: makes a habit/regular practice (a regular thing) of doing it; does it from time to time (abbreviated from -고는 하다).
Here: she would hold its little hand, and hold it again and again

지수는 아이가 깰 것을 겁내듯
Pattern: -듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: Martin treats this as an abbreviation of the pattern where 듯 is used as a post-modifier, i.e. -(으)ㄴ 듯(이), -(으)ㄹ 듯(이), -는 듯(이); but in any case you should keep them distinct. In the pattern here, -듯 attaches directly to the base without any intervening modifier.
Here: Chisu, as if fearful that the child might wake up

소리 죽여 울었다.
Pattern: -어(서)
Pattern Gloss: Naked infinitive in -어(서).
Here: wept silently/muffledly

눈물이 빠져나올수록 몸은 ... 무겁게 가라앉았다.
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ수록
Pattern Gloss: increasingly with (being/doing); the more (better, bigger, etc.)... the more. This clause with -(으)ㄹ수록 can optionally be preceded by the same verb in the conditional -(으)면 form: VERB-(으)면 VERB-(으)ㄹ수록.
Here: the more her tears fell, the more her body... sank heavily

부기가 빠지지 않아 제대로 맞지 않는 신발
Pattern: -아(서)
Pattern Gloss: Naked infinitive in -아(서)
Here: her shoes, which didn't fit properly because her swelling hadn't gone down

환하게 불이 밝혀진 빵집.
Pattern: -어 진다
Pattern Gloss: Besides meaning gets to be or becomes with adjectives, can have the effect of a "get-passive" in English or of middles or reflexives in languages which have these. The implication is that the subject/agent is either (sometimes adversely) affected by the action, and/or has no control over the action of the verb.
Here: a bakery with its lights shining brightly

셔터가 내려진 애견 가게.
Pattern: -어 진다
Pattern Gloss: Besides meaning gets to be or becomes with adjectives, can have the effect of a "get-passive" in English or of middles or reflexives in languages which have these. The implication is that the subject/agent is either (sometimes adversely) affected by the action, and/or has no control over the action of the verb.
Here: a pet store, with its shutter down

유리 너머로 지수를 바라보았다.
Pattern: NOUN 너머(로)
Pattern Gloss:beyond, over, the other side of ( something tall/high) NOUN; over = more than, in excess of NOUN; beyond NOUN.
Here: gazed out at Chisu through [and over] the glass

그녀를 향해 오려는 듯
Pattern: -는 듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: as (if) doing..., here combined with the purposive pattern in -(으)려[고] 하다, with -[고 하-] dropped.
Here: as if wanting to come toward her

좁은 가게 안이 드러났다 다시
Pattern: -다(가)
Pattern Gloss: transferentive: does/did and THEN; does/did BUT (emphasizing a shift or displacement in the action).
Here: the confined interior of the shop came into view then once again ...

어둠에 잠기기를 반복하고
Pattern: -기(를) 반복한다
Pattern Gloss: does VERB over and over again; repeats VERBing.
Here: repeated its becoming immersed in darkness

곳곳에서 지수를 향해
Pattern: NOUN(을) 향해(서)
Pattern Gloss: in the direction of NOUN.
Here: sparkled toward Chisu from here and there

번득였다.
Pattern: -인다
Pattern Gloss: with mimetics: similar to -대다 and –거리다, this means does repeatedly/continuously; does and does; keeps doing, does on and on, does (keeps doing) it away; does again and again, does over and over again.
Here: sparkled toward Chisu from here and there

지수가 유리에 손을 대려는 순간
Pattern: -(으)려는 순간
Pattern Gloss: ← -(으)려[고 하]는 순간 just at the moment when one means to/is intending to... ; just as one is about to...
Here: just in the moment when Chisu was about to extend her hand to the glass

철망을 긁으며
Pattern: -(으)며
Pattern Gloss: For -(으)면서 while, at the same time, (doing) simultaneously.
Here: the puppies, who were scratching at their metal wire and barking continuously

짖어대던 강아지들이
Pattern: -어 댄다
Pattern Gloss: (does) terribly, awfully, a lot, like mad/anything (gives iterative and/or emphatic force to a preceding verb infinitive).
Here: the puppies, who were scratching at their metal wire and barking continuously

지수를 바라보기에도 지쳤다는 듯
Pattern: -다는 듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: the pattern meaning like, as, giving the appearance of… ; appearing (to be), looking (like); seeming as if; as if/though plus an abbreviated indirect quotation in -다[고 하-], so: as if to say…
Here: as if to say that they were also exhausted from gazing at Chisa

옹크린 몸속에 머리를 파묻을 때까지도
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ 때까지도
Pattern Gloss: even until the point/time when...; even (right) up to the time when.
Here: even until they buried their heads in the curled-up bodies

전화는 언제까지고 그치지 않을 기세로 울리고 있었다.
Pattern: -(이)고
Pattern Gloss: Akin to expressions like 몇 번이고 time and time again. In Middle Korean and in some Korean dialects, verbs in "WH-questions" (i.e. questions which contain a question word like "what?" "how many" or the like, as opposed to yes-no questions) take a question ending in final -고 rather than -가 as in the modern standard language. The expression here, then, is somewhat archaic in tone: 'until when?' → 'never'. Also: -(으)ㄹ 기세로 with an indication/hint that it would/might...
Here: the telephone was ringing, with the attitude that it would never stop, ever

멍하니 서 있는 지수
Pattern: -어니
Pattern Gloss: adverb in-어니/-아니 ← 허니 ← 하니 (= 하게). Cf. 일찌거니 a bit earlier, 슬그머니 surreptitiously, 멀거니 with a far-off look, absentmindedly, etc.
Here: Chisu, who was standing vacantly

“내일 어머니가 오시기로 했어.”
Pattern: -기로 한다
Pattern Gloss: decides to do.
Here: "My mother has decided to come tomorrow/It's been arranged for my mother to come tomorrow."

지수의 방을 들여다보며 남편이...
Pattern: -(으)며
Pattern Gloss: For -(으)면서 while, at the same time, (doing) simultaneously.
Here: Her husband, peering into Chisu's room

한 옴큼의 알약을 먹는 이유가 의아스러울 만큼
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ 만큼
Pattern Gloss: 1) to the extent that will do/be (= -(으)ㄹ 정도(로)); 2) enough to do, as much as necessary for doing.
Here: to the extent that the reason for his taking a fistful of medicine was suspicious

전염성이 없어진다는 약 복용 후 삼 주일.
Pattern: -ㄴ다는
Pattern Gloss: ← -는/ㄴ다[고 하]는 about which they say/it is said that …[modifying some following noun].
Here: three weeks after taking the medication, about which it was claimed that the contagiousness would go away

비행기가 흰 선을 타고 날아가는 것을 보는 순간
Pattern: -는 순간
Pattern Gloss: the moment/instant one does it; as soon as...; no sooner had one done it, than ...; just when/as...
Here: the moment she saw the airplane flying along the white line

비행기가 오르기라도 한 듯한 어지럼증
Pattern: -기라도 한다
Pattern Gloss: similar to -기나 한다 do (at the least) or do (even though it’s not the best option) or do (or the likes). I.e., pseudo-particle -(이)라도 on nominalizer -기 + 한다.
Here: a dizziness, as if the airplane had gone up into the air or something

그런 곳이야 늘 데려가지 않았냐는 듯
Pattern: -는 듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: as (if) doing... . Here combined with an indirect quotation in -(으)냐[고 하-] asks whether... .
Here: as if asking, 'places like that -- don't I always take you there?'

그가 몇 개인가의 서류
Pattern: WH …-(이)ㄴ가
Pattern Gloss: some ~ or other.
Here: He [handed her] a few documents

지수가 잃어버렸던 것
Pattern: -었던
Pattern Gloss: retrospective modifier -던 on a past base. By itself, the -던 means... that has been observed to (be or do); ...that has been doing, ...that used to do; ...that was, ...that used to be. Combined with the past base, the sense is of more complete-and-done and/or more remote in the past.
Here: the one that Chisu had lost

달라 보였다.
Pattern: -어 보이다
Pattern Gloss: look like, appear to be.
Here: it looked different [from the one that Chisu had lost]

 “너무 감격하지 마, 그러면 내가 미안해지잖아.”
Pattern: -잖-
Pattern Gloss: Rhetorical retort: come on, isn't it (actually) the case that...? < -쟎- < -지 않-.
Here: "Don't get too emotional-- then I get all sorry, don't you know."

전혀 웃고 있지 않다는 것
Pattern: -다는 것
Pattern Gloss: the putative or alleged fact that... In origin, from the indirect quotation pattern in -다[고 하]는 것, etc.,
Here: the fact that he was not smiling at all

“이러다 큰일낸다구.”
Pattern: -다(가는)
Pattern Gloss: warning pattern in -다가는: if one keeps on doing then (unfortunately/bad consequence)...
Here: "Keep this up, and you'll really do something stupid."

아버지가 한 말은 그것뿐이었다.
Pattern: 뿐
Pattern Gloss: only, merely, just, alone (+ copula -이다).
Here: That was all her father had said.

누구라도
Pattern: -(이)라도
Pattern Gloss: (1) even if (it be); (2) just, (or the) like (= 이나); or even; any, some. Here: somebody or other.
Here: For all she knew, anybody else would have been unable to find anything different to say.

달리 할말을 찾지 못했을지도 모른다.
Pattern: -었을지도 모른다
Pattern Gloss: perhaps was/may well have been the case that ...
Here: For all she knew, anybody else would have been unable to find anything different to say.

그 아이가 자라
Pattern: -아(서)
Pattern Gloss: Naked infinitive in -아(서).
Here: until the child grew up [and looked for its grandfather]

할아버지를 찾게 되기까지
Pattern: -기까지
Pattern Gloss: until (even) [the point when] it does.
Here: until the child grew up and looked for its grandfather

누구라도 보이는 반응은 아니었다.
Pattern: -(이)라도
Pattern Gloss: (1) even if (it be); (2) just, (or the) like (= 이나); or even; any, some. Here: somebody or other.
Here: was not the reaction that just anybody showed

그 아버지의 딸이었던 날들
Pattern: -었던
Pattern Gloss: retrospective modifier -던 on a past base. By itself, the -던 means ...that has been observed to (be or do); ...that has been doing, ...that used to do; ...that was, ... that used to be. Combined with the past base, the sense is of more complete-and-done and/or more remote in the past. Note also the analogy with 그 아버지의 아들 like father like son.
Here: the days when she was her father's little girl

머리카락을 흩트려놓던 ... 손가락
Pattern: -어 놓는다
Pattern Gloss: A) does for later, does in advance, gets it ready beforehand. B) does it and leaves it that way, does it for now.
Here: his fingers...which used to muss up her hair

아버지의 기다란 손가락.
Pattern: ㅎ-stem –다랗다
Pattern Gloss: Modifier form 기다란 from 기다랗다 be ever so long, built on 기 ㄹ- + bound adjective -다랗다 (-다래요) is rather, quite, sort of (sorta), kind of (kinda); is ...ish. The loss of the final ㄹ of 길다 is regular for all ㄹ-extending bases in this pattern.
Here: her father's ever-so-long fingers

사진 속의 아버지를 들여다보고 또 보곤 했다.
Pattern: VERB1-고 또 VERB2-곤 한다
Pattern Gloss: emphatic equivalent to the habitual pattern in just -곤 한다 makes a habit/regular practice (a regular thing) of doing it; does it from time to time.
Here: she would peer at her father in the photo over and over again

넘어질 것을 겁내기라도 하는 듯
Pattern: -는 듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: as (if) doing... Note also -기라도 한다 한다, similar to -기나 한다: do (at the least) or do (even though it’s not the best option) or do (or the likes). I.e., pseudo-particle -(이)라도 on nominalizer -기 + 한다.
Here: as if fearing she might fall over or something

이 땅에서의 일은
Pattern: 에서의
Pattern Gloss: happening in a place + adnominal 의.
Here: things here in this place

결혼식이라는 것을 올리고
Pattern: -(이)라는 것
Pattern Gloss: the putative or alleged fact that... (here as object). In origin, from the indirect quotation pattern in –(이)라[고 하]는 것, etc.,
Here: experienced ['rendered up'] this thing called a 'wedding ceremony'

아이를 낳고 살아가면서도
Pattern: -(으)면서도
Pattern Gloss: even while ...-ing; even whilst ...-ing.
Here: even while carrying on living after having a baby

지수는 문득문득 중얼거리곤 했다.
Pattern: -거린다
Pattern Gloss: with mimetics: does repeatedly/continuously; does and does; keeps doing, does on and on, does (keeps doing) it away; does again and again, does over and over again. Also habitual -곤 한다 (abbreviated from -고는 하다): makes a habit/regular practice (a regular thing) of doing it; does it from time to time.
Here: Chisu would sometimes suddenly mutter

그런 충동을 참을 수 없는 날이면
Pattern: -(이)면
Pattern Gloss: When it comes/came to...; As for ...
Here: On days when she could not bear/control this impulse

되는 대로
Pattern: -는 대로
Pattern Gloss: in accordance with the way one does/is; such as it does/is; just as they are. With 되- this pattern produces a somewhat idiomatic meaning: as much as possible, insofar as possible.
Here: any old which way

짐을 우겨넣은 커다란 트렁크
Pattern: serial verb
Pattern Gloss: 우겨(서) 넣- cram and stick into. Also: ㅎ-stem in –다랗다: 커다란 from 커다랗-, built on 커 (infinitive of 크-) + bound adjective -다랗다 (-다래요) is rather, quite, sort of (sorta), kind of (kinda); is ...-ish.
Here: her huge trunk, stuffed any old which way with her things

코를 골며 잠든 남편이 깰세라
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ세라
Pattern Gloss: [archaic] (there is a fear) lest, there is a danger of; it will, it might; in a way so as to avoid.
Here: for fear lest her snoring husband might wake up

조심스레 방문을 닫고
Pattern: -스레
Pattern Gloss: = -스러이 like, as; in a blah-blah-blah kind of way or manner (adverb derived from -스럽다).
Here: having closed the door carefully

빈 거리를 지나
Pattern: -아(서)
Pattern Gloss: Naked infinitive in -아(서).
Here: passed through the empty streets until arriving at the airport

공항에 이르기까지
Pattern: -기까지
Pattern Gloss: until (even) [the point when] it does.
Here: passed through the empty streets until arriving at the airport

꿈속에서도 그녀는 놀랄 만큼 사나운 자신의 심장 소리를 들었다.
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ 만큼
Pattern Gloss: 1) to the extent that will do/be (= -(으)ㄹ 정도(로)); 2) enough to do, as much as necessary for doing.
Here: even in her dream, she heard the sound of her own surprisingly savage heart

출국장을 나서려 하면
Pattern: -(으)려 하면
Pattern Gloss: if/when one intends to/is about to... ← -(으)려[고] 하면.
Here: when she intended to/made to step into the departures area

영영 지지 않을 듯하던 해
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ 듯하다
Pattern Gloss: like, as, giving the appearance of...; appearing (to be), looking (like); seeming as if; as if/though. On the future/prospective modifier, as here, the meaning is giving the appearance that it might or will ...; seeming as if/though it might.
Here: the sun, which had seemed as if it would never set

이제 곧 남편 일행을 태운 배가 돌아오리라.
Pattern: -(으)리라
Pattern Gloss: prospective assertive: equivalent to -(으)리다, -겠다 and -(으)ㄹ 것이라 in quotations. The prospective assertive -(으)리다 means A) I will gladly do it, or B) will probably be or do. Note that the function is typically quotation to oneself/quoted thought, even when there is no overt quotation particle (as here).
Here: the boat carrying her husband and his pals will come back any time now

옆자리에 있는 것조차 잊어버렸던 남자가 말했다.
Pattern: 조차
Pattern Gloss: even, too, to boot, in addition, into the bargain.
Here: said the man beside her, about whom she had forgotten completely

서울에 내리면 아침이 되리라 했다.
Pattern: -(으)리라
Pattern Gloss: prospective assertive: equivalent to -(으)리다, -겠다 and -(으)ㄹ 것이라 in quotations. The prospective assertive -(으)리다 means A) I will gladly do it, or B) will probably be or do. Note that the function is typically quotation to oneself/quoted thought, even when there is no overt quotation particle.
Here: When I disembark in Seoul, it will be morning, she thought to herself.

나흘 동안의 일들도 꿈처럼 여겨지지 않을까.
Pattern: -어 진다
Pattern Gloss: Besides meaning gets to be or becomes with adjectives, can have the effect of a "get-passive" in English or of middles or reflexives in languages which have these. The implication is that the subject/agent is either (sometimes adversely) affected by the action, and/or has no control over the action of the verb.
Here: the affairs of these four days, too -- won't they perhaps feel like a dream?

골프 장비를 대여하는 일을 하다 그만둔 지도 이 년이 되었다고 했다.
Pattern: -다(가)
Pattern Gloss: transferentive: does/did and THEN; does/did BUT (emphasizing a shift or displacement in the action). Also: -(으)ㄴ 지도 even since ...-ing (for time elapsed).
Here: he said it had been two years since he had quit his job of renting out golf equipment

골프 백들이 나날이 낡아가고
Pattern: -어 간다
Pattern Gloss: gradually (goes on doing) keeps growing (getting to be, becoming).
Here: the golf bags were getting older with each passing day

“그래서 다른 곳으로 가볼까 해요.”
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ까 한다
Pattern Gloss: is thinking of ...-ing; has a mind to...
Here: "So I'm thinking of going some place else."

발리나 타히티, 아니면 카리브 해 쪽이든지......”
Pattern: NOUN-(이)든지
Pattern Gloss: The endings -던 and -든 can be treated as spelling variants, although some Korean grammarians try to maintain an artificial (for Seoul, anyway) distinction: -던지 whether /maybe one has been doing vs. -든지 (used with an interrogative-indefinite word) any at all, regardless of which, ...-(so)ever, (whatever) one may do, (how, etc.) -ever it (has been observed to) be. Nowadays the whatever meaning is usually spelled with -든지, and this is the meaning intended in this passage. This pattern can optionally be followed by 간에, e.g. 무슨 일이 있든지 (간에) 오늘은 나가지 마라 Don't go out today no matter what happens. This 간에 can also show up in paired phrases of contrastive meaning, in which case it comes after the second of the pair: 읽든지 안 읽고 싶든지(간에) 읽어야 돼 whether you want to read it or not, you have to The meaning in our example here is closer to just or (whatever).
Here: Bali or Tahiti, or in the direction of the Caribbean..."

구름 조각 하나가 길게 풀어진 채
Pattern: -(으)ㄴ 채(로)
Pattern Gloss: just as it is or did, (in) the original state of....
Here: one piece of cloud, stretched out long

바라보는 사이
Pattern: -는 사이(에)
Pattern Gloss: while ...-ing; during the interval (사이) while one is ...-ing.
Here: while she was watching, the pink in the cloud gradually faded, until...

구름의 분홍빛이 점차 바래지다
Pattern: -다(가)
Pattern Gloss: transferentive: does/did and THEN; does/did BUT (emphasizing a shift or displacement in the action).
Here: while she was watching, the pink in the cloud gradually faded, until...

잿빛으로, 검은 덩어리로 변해갔다.
Pattern: -어 간다
Pattern Gloss: gradually (goes on doing) keeps growing (getting to be, becoming).
Here: it gradually changed into a grey color, into a black mass

어디론가
Pattern: WH …-(이)ㄴ가
Pattern Gloss: some ~ or other.
Here: [even after the man had disappeared] somewhere

사라지고 난 후에도
Pattern: -고 난 후(에)
Pattern Gloss: after ...-ing; after finishing ...-ing.
Here: even after the man had disappeared somewhere

검게만 보이던 물
Pattern: -게만
Pattern Gloss: in only such-and-such a manner/way.
Here: the water, which had look nothing but black

달의 가장자리, 그 어느 어름에선가 흰 줄기가 ...
Pattern: WH …-(이)ㄴ가
Pattern Gloss: some ~ or other.
Here: from somewhere on the rim around the moon, from some juncture, a white rope ...

그녀의 머리 위로 닿아올 듯 선명한 줄
Pattern: -(으)ㄹ 듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: like, as, giving the appearance of...; appearing (to be), looking (like); seeming as if; as if/though. On the future/prospective modifier, as here, the meaning is giving the appearance that it might or will ...; seeming as if/though it might.
Here: a clear line, that seemed as if it might reach down above her head

달을 향해, 그 뒤편 어둠 속을 향해 둥둥 떠가듯
Pattern: -듯(이)
Pattern Gloss: Martin treats this as an abbreviation of the pattern where 듯 is used as a post-modifier, i.e. -(으)ㄴ 듯(이), -(으)ㄹ 듯(이), -는 듯 (이); but in any case you should keep them distinct. In the pattern here, -듯 attaches directly to the base without any intervening modifier.
Here: as if it might flow away toward the moon, toward the inside of the darkness behind it

지수는 닿을 수 없는 곳을 향해 손을 내밀었다.
Pattern: NOUN(을) 향해(서)
Pattern Gloss: in the direction of NOUN.
Here: Chisu reached out toward a place that she couldn't reach